Everyone my age remembers where they were and what they were doing
when they first heard about the contest. I was sitting in my hideout watching
cartoons when the news bulletin broke in on my video feed, announcing that
James Halliday had died during the night.
I’d heard of Halliday, of course. Everyone had. He was the videogame
designer responsible for creating the OASIS, a massively multiplayer online
game that had gradually evolved into the globally networked virtual reality most
of humanity now used on a daily basis. The unprecedented success of the OASIS
had made Halliday one of the wealthiest people in the world.
At first, I couldn’t understand why the media was making such a big deal of
the billionaire’s death. After all, the people of Planet Earth had other concerns.
The ongoing energy crisis. Catastrophic climate change. Widespread famine,
poverty, and disease. Half a dozen wars. You know: “dogs and cats living
together … mass hysteria!” Normally, the newsfeeds didn’t interrupt everyone’s
interactive sitcoms and soap operas unless something really major had happened.
Like the outbreak of some new killer virus, or another major city vanishing in a
mushroom cloud. Big stuff like that. As famous as he was, Halliday’s death
should have warranted only a brief segment on the evening news, so the
unwashed masses could shake their heads in envy when the newscasters
announced the obscenely large amount of money that would be doled out to the
rich man’s heirs.
But that was the rub. James Halliday had no heirs.
He had died a sixty-seven-year-old bachelor, with no living relatives and, by
most accounts, without a single friend. He’d spent the last fifteen years of his life
in self-imposed isolation, during which time—if the rumors were to be believed
—he’d gone completely insane.
So the real jaw-dropping news that January morning, the news that had
everyone from Toronto to Tokyo crapping in their cornflakes, concerned the
contents of Halliday’s last will and testament, and the fate of his vast fortune.

Halliday had prepared a short video message, along with instructions that it be
released to the world media at the time of his death. He’d also arranged to have a
copy of the video e-mailed to every single OASIS user that same morning. I still
remember hearing the familiar electronic chime when it arrived in my inbox, just
a few seconds after I saw that first news bulletin.
His video message was actually a meticulously constructed short film titled
Anorak’s Invitation. A famous eccentric, Halliday had harbored a lifelong
obsession with the 1980s, the decade during which he’d been a teenager, and
Anorak’s Invitation was crammed with obscure ’80s pop culture references,
nearly all of which were lost on me the first time I viewed it.
The entire video was just over five minutes in length, and in the days and
weeks that followed, it would become the most scrutinized piece of film in
history, surpassing even the Zapruder film in the amount of painstaking frameby-frame analysis devoted to it. My entire generation would come to know every
second of Halliday’s message by heart.

Anorak’s Invitation begins with the sound of trumpets, the opening of an old
song called “Dead Man’s Party.”
The song plays over a dark screen for the first few seconds, until the trumpets
are joined by a guitar, and that’s when Halliday appears. But he’s not a sixtyseven-year-old man, ravaged by time and illness. He looks just as he did on the
cover of Time magazine back in 2014, a tall, thin, healthy man in his early
forties, with unkempt hair and his trademark horn-rimmed eyeglasses. He’s also
wearing the same clothing he wore in the Time cover photo: faded jeans and a
vintage Space Invaders T-shirt.
Halliday is at a high-school dance being held in a large gymnasium. He’s
surrounded by teenagers whose clothing, hairstyles, and dance moves all indicate
that the time period is the late 1980s.* Halliday is dancing, too—something no
one ever saw him do in real life. Grinning maniacally, he spins in rapid circles,
swinging his arms and head in time with the song, flawlessly cycling through
several signature ’80s dance moves. But Halliday has no dance partner. He is, as
the saying goes, dancing with himself.
A few lines of text appear briefly at the lower left-hand corner of the screen,
listing the name of the band, the song’s title, the record label, and the year of
release, as if this were an old music video airing on MTV: Oingo Boingo, “Dead
Man’s Party,” MCA Records, 1985.
When the lyrics kick in, Halliday begins to lip-synch along, still gyrating: “All

dressed up with nowhere to go. Walking with a dead man over my shoulder.
Don’t run away, it’s only me.…”
He abruptly stops dancing and makes a cutting motion with his right hand,
silencing the music. At the same moment, the dancers and the gymnasium
behind him vanish, and the scene around him suddenly changes.
Halliday now stands at the front of a funeral parlor, next to an open casket.† A
second, much older Halliday lies inside the casket, his body emaciated and
ravaged by cancer. Shiny quarters cover each of his eyelids.‡
The younger Halliday gazes down at the corpse of his older self with mock
sadness, then turns to address the assembled mourners.§ Halliday snaps his
fingers and a scroll appears in his right hand. He opens it with a flourish and it
unfurls to the floor, unraveling down the aisle in front of him. He breaks the
fourth wall, addressing the viewer, and begins to read.
“I, James Donovan Halliday, being of sound mind and disposing memory, do
hereby make, publish, and declare this instrument to be my last will and
testament, hereby revoking any and all wills and codicils by me at any time
heretofore made.…” He continues reading, faster and faster, plowing through
several more paragraphs of legalese, until he’s speaking so rapidly that the words
are unintelligible. Then he stops abruptly. “Forget it,” he says. “Even at that
speed, it would take me a month to read the whole thing. Sad to say, I don’t have
that kind of time.” He drops the scroll and it vanishes in a shower of gold dust.
“Let me just give you the highlights.”
The funeral parlor vanishes, and the scene changes once again. Halliday now
stands in front of an immense bank vault door. “My entire estate, including a
controlling share of stock in my company, Gregarious Simulation Systems, is to
be placed in escrow until such time as a single condition I have set forth in my
will is met. The first individual to meet that condition will inherit my entire
fortune, currently valued in excess of two hundred and forty billion dollars.”
The vault door swings open and Halliday walks inside. The interior of the
vault is enormous, and it contains a huge stack of gold bars, roughly the size of a
large house. “Here’s the dough I’m putting up for grabs,” Halliday says, grinning
broadly. “What the hell. You can’t take it with you, right?”
Halliday leans against the stack of gold bars, and the camera pulls in tight on
his face. “Now, I’m sure you’re wondering, what do you have to do to get your
hands on all this moolah? Well, hold your horses, kids. I’m getting to that.…”
He pauses dramatically, his expression changing to that of a child about to reveal
a very big secret.
Halliday snaps his fingers again and the vault disappears. In the same instant,

Halliday shrinks and morphs into a small boy wearing brown corduroys and a
faded The Muppet Show T-shirt.* The young Halliday stands in a cluttered living
room with burnt orange carpeting, wood-paneled walls, and kitschy late-’70s
decor. A 21-inch Zenith television sits nearby, with an Atari 2600 game console
hooked up to it.
“This was the first videogame system I ever owned,” Halliday says, now in a
child’s voice. “An Atari 2600. I got it for Christmas in 1979.” He plops down in
front of the Atari, picks up a joystick, and begins to play. “My favorite game was
this one,” he says, nodding at the TV screen, where a small square is traveling
through a series of simple mazes. “It was called Adventure. Like many early
videogames, Adventure was designed and programmed by just one person. But
back then, Atari refused to give its programmers credit for their work, so the
name of a game’s creator didn’t actually appear anywhere on the packaging.” On
the TV screen, we see Halliday use a sword to slay a red dragon, although due to
the game’s crude low-resolution graphics, this looks more like a square using an
arrow to stab a deformed duck.
“So the guy who created Adventure, a man named Warren Robinett, decided
to hide his name inside the game itself. He hid a key in one of the game’s
labyrinths. If you found this key, a small pixel-sized gray dot, you could use it to
enter a secret room where Robinett had hidden his name.” On the TV, Halliday
guides his square protagonist into the game’s secret room, where the words
CREATED BY WARREN ROBINETT appear in the center of the screen.
“This,” Halliday says, pointing to the screen with genuine reverence, “was the
very first videogame Easter egg. Robinett hid it in his game’s code without
telling a soul, and Atari manufactured and shipped Adventure all over the world
without knowing about the secret room. They didn’t find out about the Easter
egg’s existence until a few months later, when kids all over the world began to
discover it. I was one of those kids, and finding Robinett’s Easter egg for the
first time was one of the coolest videogaming experiences of my life.”
The young Halliday drops his joystick and stands. As he does, the living room
fades away, and the scene shifts again. Halliday now stands in a dim cavern,
where light from unseen torches flickers off the damp walls. In the same instant,
Halliday’s appearance also changes once again, as he morphs into his famous
OASIS avatar, Anorak—a tall, robed wizard with a slightly more handsome
version of the adult Halliday’s face (minus the eyeglasses). Anorak is dressed in
his trademark black robes, with his avatar’s emblem (a large calligraphic letter
“A”) embroidered on each sleeve.
“Before I died,” Anorak says, speaking in a much deeper voice, “I created my
own Easter egg, and hid it somewhere inside my most popular videogame—the

OASIS. The first person to find my Easter egg will inherit my entire fortune.”
Another dramatic pause.
“The egg is well hidden. I didn’t just leave it lying under a rock somewhere. I
suppose you could say that it’s locked inside a safe that is buried in a secret room
that lies hidden at the center of a maze located somewhere”—he reaches up to
tap his right temple—“up here.
“But don’t worry. I’ve left a few clues lying around to get everyone started.
And here’s the first one.” Anorak makes a grand gesture with his right hand, and
three keys appear, spinning slowly in the air in front of him. They appear to be
made of copper, jade, and clear crystal. As the keys continue to spin, Anorak
recites a piece of verse, and as he speaks each line, it appears briefly in flaming
subtitles across the bottom of screen:
Three hidden keys open three secret gates
Wherein the errant will be tested for worthy traits
And those with the skill to survive these straits
Will reach The End where the prize awaits
As he finishes, the jade and crystal keys vanish, leaving only the copper key,
which now hangs on a chain around Anorak’s neck.
The camera follows Anorak as he turns and continues farther into the dark
cavern. A few seconds later, he arrives at a pair of massive wooden doors set into
the cavern’s rocky wall. These doors are banded with steel, and there are shields
and dragons carved into their surfaces. “I couldn’t playtest this particular game,
so I worry that I may have hidden my Easter egg a little too well. Made it too
difficult to reach. I’m not sure. If that’s the case, it’s too late to change anything
now. So I guess we’ll see.”
Anorak throws open the double doors, revealing an immense treasure room
filled with piles of glittering gold coins and jewel-encrusted goblets.* Then he
steps into the open doorway and turns to face the viewer, stretching out his arms
to hold open the giant double doors.†
“So without further ado,” Anorak announces, “let the hunt for Halliday’s
Easter egg begin!” Then he vanishes in a flash of light, leaving the viewer to
gaze through the open doorway at the glittering mounds of treasure that lay
beyond.
Then the screen fades to black.

At the end of the video, Halliday included a link to his personal website, which

had changed drastically on the morning of his death. For over a decade, the only
thing posted there had been a short looping animation that showed his avatar,
Anorak, sitting in a medieval library, hunched over a scarred worktable, mixing
potions and poring over dusty spellbooks, with a large painting of a black dragon
visible on the wall behind him.
But now that animation was gone, and in its place there was a high-score list
like those that used to appear in old coin-operated videogames. The list had ten
numbered spots, and each displayed the initials JDH—James Donovan Halliday
—followed by a score of six zeros. This high-score list quickly came to be
known as “the Scoreboard.”
Just below the Scoreboard was an icon that looked like a small leather-bound
book, which linked to a free downloadable copy of Anorak’s Almanac, a
collection of hundreds of Halliday’s undated journal entries. The Almanac was
over a thousand pages long, but it contained few details about Halliday’s
personal life or his day-to-day activities. Most of the entries were his stream-ofconsciousness observations on various classic videogames, science-fiction and
fantasy novels, movies, comic books, and ’80s pop culture, mixed with
humorous diatribes denouncing everything from organized religion to diet soda.
The Hunt, as the contest came to be known, quickly wove its way into global
culture. Like winning the lottery, finding Halliday’s Easter egg became a popular
fantasy among adults and children alike. It was a game anyone could play, and at
first, there seemed to be no right or wrong way to play it. The only thing
Anorak’s Almanac seemed to indicate was that a familiarity with Halliday’s
various obsessions would be essential to finding the egg. This led to a global
fascination with 1980s pop culture. Fifty years after the decade had ended, the
movies, music, games, and fashions of the 1980s were all the rage once again.
By 2041, spiked hair and acid-washed jeans were back in style, and covers of hit
’80s pop songs by contemporary bands dominated the music charts. People who
had actually been teenagers in the 1980s, all now approaching old age, had the
strange experience of seeing the fads and fashions of their youth embraced and
studied by their grandchildren.
A new subculture was born, composed of the millions of people who now
devoted every free moment of their lives to searching for Halliday’s egg. At first,
these individuals were known simply as “egg hunters,” but this was quickly
truncated to the nickname “gunters.”
During the first year of the Hunt, being a gunter was highly fashionable, and
nearly every OASIS user claimed to be one.
When the first anniversary of Halliday’s death arrived, the fervor surrounding
the contest began to die down. An entire year had passed and no one had found

anything. Not a single key or gate. Part of the problem was the sheer size of the
OASIS. It contained thousands of simulated worlds where the keys might be
hidden, and it could take a gunter years to conduct a thorough search of any one
of them.
Despite all of the “professional” gunters who boasted on their blogs that they
were getting closer to a breakthrough every day, the truth gradually became
apparent: No one really even knew exactly what it was they were looking for, or
where to start looking for it.
Another year passed.
And another.
Still nothing.
The general public lost all interest in the contest. People began to assume it
was all just an outlandish hoax perpetrated by a rich nut job. Others believed that
even if the egg really did exist, no one was ever going to find it. Meanwhile, the
OASIS continued to evolve and grow in popularity, protected from takeover
attempts and legal challenges by the ironclad terms of Halliday’s will and the
army of rabid lawyers he had tasked with administering his estate.
Halliday’s Easter egg gradually moved into the realm of urban legend, and the
ever-dwindling tribe of gunters gradually became the object of ridicule. Each
year, on the anniversary of Halliday’s death, newscasters jokingly reported on
their continued lack of progress. And each year, more gunters called it quits,
concluding that Halliday had indeed made the egg impossible to find.
And another year went by.
And another.
Then, on the evening of February 11, 2045, an avatar’s name appeared at the
top of the Scoreboard, for the whole world to see. After five long years, the
Copper Key had finally been found, by an eighteen-year-old kid living in a
trailer park on the outskirts of Oklahoma City.
That kid was me.
Dozens of books, cartoons, movies, and miniseries have attempted to tell the
story of everything that happened next, but every single one of them got it
wrong. So I want to set the record straight, once and for all.
* Careful analysis of this scene reveals that all of the teenagers behind
Halliday are actually extras from various John Hughes teen films who have been
digitally cut-and-pasted into the video.
† His surroundings are actually from a scene in the 1989 film Heathers.
Halliday appears to have digitally re-created the funeral parlor set and then

inserted himself into it.
‡ High-resolution scrutiny reveals that both quarters were minted in 1984.
§ The mourners are actually all actors and extras from the same funeral scene
in Heathers. Winona Ryder and Christian Slater are clearly visible in the
audience, sitting near the back.
* Halliday now looks exactly as he did in a school photo taken in 1980, when
he was eight years old.
* Analysis reveals dozens of curious items hidden among the mounds of
treasure, most notably: several early home computers (an Apple IIe, a
Commodore 64, an Atari 800XL, and a TRS-80 Color Computer 2), dozens of
videogame controllers for a variety of game systems, and hundreds of polyhedral
dice like those used in old tabletop role-playing games.
† A freeze-frame of this scene appears nearly identical to a painting by Jeff
Easley that appeared on the cover of the Dungeon Master’s Guide, a Dungeons
& Dragons rulebook published in 1983.

Being human totally sucks most of the time.
Videogames are the only thing that
make life bearable.
—Anorak’s Almanac, Chapter 91, Verses 1–2

I was jolted awake by the sound of gunfire in one of the neighboring stacks.
The shots were followed by a few minutes of muffled shouting and screaming,
then silence.
Gunfire wasn’t uncommon in the stacks, but it still shook me up. I knew I
probably wouldn’t be able to fall back asleep, so I decided to kill the remaining
hours until dawn by brushing up on a few coin-op classics. Galaga, Defender,
Asteroids. These games were outdated digital dinosaurs that had become
museum pieces long before I was born. But I was a gunter, so I didn’t think of
them as quaint low-res antiques. To me, they were hallowed artifacts. Pillars of
the pantheon. When I played the classics, I did so with a determined sort of
reverence.
I was curled up in an old sleeping bag in the corner of the trailer’s tiny laundry
room, wedged into the gap between the wall and the dryer. I wasn’t welcome in
my aunt’s room across the hall, which was fine by me. I preferred to crash in the
laundry room anyway. It was warm, it afforded me a limited amount of privacy,
and the wireless reception wasn’t too bad. And, as an added bonus, the room
smelled like liquid detergent and fabric softener. The rest of the trailer reeked of
cat piss and abject poverty.
Most of the time I slept in my hideout. But the temperature had dropped
below zero the past few nights, and as much as I hated staying at my aunt’s
place, it still beat freezing to death.
A total of fifteen people lived in my aunt’s trailer. She slept in the smallest of
its three bedrooms. The Depperts lived in the bedroom adjacent to hers, and the
Millers occupied the large master bedroom at the end of the hall. There were six
of them, and they paid the largest share of the rent. Our trailer wasn’t as crowded
as some of the other units in the stacks. It was a double-wide. Plenty of room for
everybody.
I pulled out my laptop and powered it on. It was a bulky, heavy beast, almost
ten years old. I’d found it in a trash bin behind the abandoned strip mall across

the highway. I’d been able to coax it back to life by replacing its system memory
and reloading the stone-age operating system. The processor was slower than a
sloth by current standards, but it was fine for my needs. The laptop served as my
portable research library, video arcade, and home theater system. Its hard drive
was filled with old books, movies, TV show episodes, song files, and nearly
every videogame made in the twentieth century.
I booted up my emulator and selected Robotron: 2084, one of my all-time
favorite games. I’d always loved its frenetic pace and brutal simplicity. Robotron
was all about instinct and reflexes. Playing old videogames never failed to clear
my mind and set me at ease. If I was feeling depressed or frustrated about my lot
in life, all I had to do was tap the Player One button, and my worries would
instantly slip away as my mind focused itself on the relentless pixelated
onslaught on the screen in front of me. There, inside the game’s two-dimensional
universe, life was simple: It’s just you against the machine. Move with your left
hand, shoot with your right, and try to stay alive as long as possible.
I spent a few hours blasting through wave after wave of Brains, Spheroids,
Quarks, and Hulks in my unending battle to Save the Last Human Family! But
eventually my fingers started to cramp up and I began to lose my rhythm. When
that happened at this level, things deteriorated quickly. I burned through all of
my extra lives in a matter of minutes, and my two least-favorite words appeared
on the screen: GAME OVER.
I shut down the emulator and began to browse through my video files. Over
the past five years, I’d downloaded every single movie, TV show, and cartoon
mentioned in Anorak’s Almanac. I still hadn’t watched all of them yet, of course.
That would probably take decades.
I selected an episode of Family Ties, an ’80s sitcom about a middleclass
family living in central Ohio. I’d downloaded the show because it had been one
of Halliday’s favorites, and I figured there was a chance that some clue related to
the Hunt might be hidden in one of the episodes. I’d become addicted to the
show immediately, and had now watched all 180 episodes, multiple times. I
never seemed to get tired of them.
Sitting alone in the dark, watching the show on my laptop, I always found
myself imagining that I lived in that warm, well-lit house, and that those smiling,
understanding people were my family. That there was nothing so wrong in the
world that we couldn’t sort it out by the end of a single half-hour episode (or
maybe a two-parter, if it was something really serious).
My own home life had never even remotely resembled the one depicted in
Family Ties, which was probably why I loved the show so much. I was the only
child of two teenagers, both refugees who’d met in the stacks where I’d grown

up. I don’t remember my father. When I was just a few months old, he was shot
dead while looting a grocery store during a power blackout. The only thing I
really knew about him was that he loved comic books. I’d found several old
flash drives in a box of his things, containing complete runs of The Amazing
Spider-Man, The X-Men, and Green Lantern. My mom once told me that my dad
had given me an alliterative name, Wade Watts, because he thought it sounded
like the secret identity of a superhero. Like Peter Parker or Clark Kent. Knowing
that made me think he must have been a cool guy, despite how he’d died.
My mother, Loretta, had raised me on her own. We’d lived in a small RV in
another part of the stacks. She had two full-time OASIS jobs, one as a
telemarketer, the other as an escort in an online brothel. She used to make me
wear earplugs at night so I wouldn’t hear her in the next room, talking dirty to
tricks in other time zones. But the earplugs didn’t work very well, so I would
watch old movies instead, with the volume turned way up.
I was introduced to the OASIS at an early age, because my mother used it as a
virtual babysitter. As soon as I was old enough to wear a visor and a pair of
haptic gloves, my mom helped me create my first OASIS avatar. Then she stuck
me in a corner and went back to work, leaving me to explore an entirely new
world, very different from the one I’d known up until then.
From that moment on, I was more or less raised by the OASIS’s interactive
educational programs, which any kid could access for free. I spent a big chunk of
my childhood hanging out in a virtual-reality simulation of Sesame Street,
singing songs with friendly Muppets and playing interactive games that taught
me how to walk, talk, add, subtract, read, write, and share. Once I’d mastered
those skills, it didn’t take me long to discover that the OASIS was also the
world’s biggest public library, where even a penniless kid like me had access to
every book ever written, every song ever recorded, and every movie, television
show, videogame, and piece of artwork ever created. The collected knowledge,
art, and amusements of all human civilization were there, waiting for me. But
gaining access to all of that information turned out to be something of a mixed
blessing. Because that was when I found out the truth.

I don’t know, maybe your experience differed from mine. For me, growing up as
a human being on the planet Earth in the twenty-first century was a real kick in
the teeth. Existentially speaking.
The worst thing about being a kid was that no one told me the truth about my
situation. In fact, they did the exact opposite. And, of course, I believed them,
because I was just a kid and I didn’t know any better. I mean, Christ, my brain

hadn’t even grown to full size yet, so how could I be expected to know when the
adults were bullshitting me?
So I swallowed all of the dark ages nonsense they fed me. Some time passed. I
grew up a little, and I gradually began to figure out that pretty much everyone
had been lying to me about pretty much everything since the moment I emerged
from my mother’s womb.
This was an alarming revelation.
It gave me trust issues later in life.
I started to figure out the ugly truth as soon as I began to explore the free
OASIS libraries. The facts were right there waiting for me, hidden in old books
written by people who weren’t afraid to be honest. Artists and scientists and
philosophers and poets, many of them long dead. As I read the words they’d left
behind, I finally began to get a grip on the situation. My situation. Our situation.
What most people referred to as “the human condition.”
It was not good news.
I wish someone had just told me the truth right up front, as soon as I was old
enough to understand it. I wish someone had just said:
“Here’s the deal, Wade. You’re something called a ‘human being.’ That’s a
really smart kind of animal. Like every other animal on this planet, we’re
descended from a single-celled organism that lived millions of years ago. This
happened by a process called evolution, and you’ll learn more about it later. But
trust me, that’s really how we all got here. There’s proof of it everywhere, buried
in the rocks. That story you heard? About how we were all created by a superpowerful dude named God who lives up in the sky? Total bullshit. The whole
God thing is actually an ancient fairy tale that people have been telling one
another for thousands of years. We made it all up. Like Santa Claus and the
Easter Bunny.
“Oh, and by the way … there’s no Santa Claus or Easter Bunny. Also bullshit.
Sorry, kid. Deal with it.
“You’re probably wondering what happened before you got here. An awful lot
of stuff, actually. Once we evolved into humans, things got pretty interesting. We
figured out how to grow food and domesticate animals so we didn’t have to
spend all of our time hunting. Our tribes got much bigger, and we spread across
the entire planet like an unstoppable virus. Then, after fighting a bunch of wars
with each other over land, resources, and our made-up gods, we eventually got
all of our tribes organized into a ‘global civilization.’ But, honestly, it wasn’t all
that organized, or civilized, and we continued to fight a lot of wars with each
other. But we also figured out how to do science, which helped us develop
technology. For a bunch of hairless apes, we’ve actually managed to invent some

pretty incredible things. Computers. Medicine. Lasers. Microwave ovens.
Artificial hearts. Atomic bombs. We even sent a few guys to the moon and
brought them back. We also created a global communications network that lets
us all talk to each other, all around the world, all the time. Pretty impressive,
right?
“But that’s where the bad news comes in. Our global civilization came at a
huge cost. We needed a whole bunch of energy to build it, and we got that
energy by burning fossil fuels, which came from dead plants and animals buried
deep in the ground. We used up most of this fuel before you got here, and now
it’s pretty much all gone. This means that we no longer have enough energy to
keep our civilization running like it was before. So we’ve had to cut back. Bigtime. We call this the Global Energy Crisis, and it’s been going on for a while
now.
“Also, it turns out that burning all of those fossil fuels had some nasty side
effects, like raising the temperature of our planet and screwing up the
environment. So now the polar ice caps are melting, sea levels are rising, and the
weather is all messed up. Plants and animals are dying off in record numbers,
and lots of people are starving and homeless. And we’re still fighting wars with
each other, mostly over the few resources we have left.
“Basically, kid, what this all means is that life is a lot tougher than it used to
be, in the Good Old Days, back before you were born. Things used to be
awesome, but now they’re kinda terrifying. To be honest, the future doesn’t look
too bright. You were born at a pretty crappy time in history. And it looks like
things are only gonna get worse from here on out. Human civilization is in
‘decline.’ Some people even say it’s ‘collapsing.’
“You’re probably wondering what’s going to happen to you. That’s easy. The
same thing is going to happen to you that has happened to every other human
being who has ever lived. You’re going to die. We all die. That’s just how it is.
“What happens when you die? Well, we’re not completely sure. But the
evidence seems to suggest that nothing happens. You’re just dead, your brain
stops working, and then you’re not around to ask annoying questions anymore.
Those stories you heard? About going to a wonderful place called ‘heaven’
where there is no more pain or death and you live forever in a state of perpetual
happiness? Also total bullshit. Just like all that God stuff. There’s no evidence of
a heaven and there never was. We made that up too. Wishful thinking. So now
you have to live the rest of your life knowing you’re going to die someday and
disappear forever.
“Sorry.”

OK, on second thought, maybe honesty isn’t the best policy after all. Maybe it
isn’t a good idea to tell a newly arrived human being that he’s been born into a
world of chaos, pain, and poverty just in time to watch everything fall to pieces.
I discovered all of that gradually over several years, and it still made me feel like
jumping off a bridge.
Luckily, I had access to the OASIS, which was like having an escape hatch
into a better reality. The OASIS kept me sane. It was my playground and my
preschool, a magical place where anything was possible.
The OASIS is the setting of all my happiest childhood memories. When my
mom didn’t have to work, we would log in at the same time and play games or
go on interactive storybook adventures together. She used to have to force me to
log out every night, because I never wanted to return to the real world. Because
the real world sucked.
I never blamed my mom for the way things were. She was a victim of fate and
cruel circumstance, like everyone else. Her generation had it the hardest. She’d
been born into a world of plenty, then had to watch it all slowly vanish. More
than anything, I remember feeling sorry for her. She was depressed all the time,
and taking drugs seemed to be the only thing she truly enjoyed. Of course, they
were what eventually killed her. When I was eleven years old, she shot a bad
batch of something into her arm and died on our ratty fold-out sofa bed while
listening to music on an old mp3 player I’d repaired and given to her the
previous Christmas.
That was when I had to move in with my mom’s sister, Alice. Aunt Alice
didn’t take me in out of kindness or familial responsibility. She did it to get the
extra food vouchers from the government every month. Most of the time, I had
to find food on my own. This usually wasn’t a problem, because I had a talent
for finding and fixing old computers and busted OASIS consoles, which I sold to
pawnshops or traded for food vouchers. I earned enough to keep from going
hungry, which was more than a lot of my neighbors could say.
The year after my mom died, I spent a lot of time wallowing in self-pity and
despair. I tried to look on the bright side, to remind myself that, orphaned or not,
I was still better off than most of the kids in Africa. And Asia. And North
America, too. I’d always had a roof over my head and more than enough food to
eat. And I had the OASIS. My life wasn’t so bad. At least that’s what I kept
telling myself, in a vain attempt to stave off the epic loneliness I now felt.
Then the Hunt for Halliday’s Easter egg began. That was what saved me, I
think. Suddenly I’d found something worth doing. A dream worth chasing. For

the last five years, the Hunt had given me a goal and purpose. A quest to fulfill.
A reason to get up in the morning. Something to look forward to.
The moment I began searching for the egg, the future no longer seemed so
bleak.

I was halfway through the fourth episode of my Family Ties mini-marathon
when the laundry room door creaked open and my aunt Alice walked in, a
malnourished harpy in a housecoat, clutching a basket of dirty clothes. She
looked more lucid than usual, which was bad news. She was much easier to deal
with when she was high.
She glanced over at me with the usual look of disdain and started to load her
clothes into the washer. Then her expression changed and she peeked around the
dryer to get a better look at me. Her eyes went wide when she spotted my laptop.
I quickly closed it and began to shove it into my backpack, but I knew it was
already too late.
“Hand it over, Wade,” she ordered, reaching for the laptop. “I can pawn it to
help pay our rent.”
“No!” I shouted, twisting away from her. “Come on, Aunt Alice. I need it for
school.”
“What you need is to show some gratitude!” she barked. “Everyone else
around here has to pay rent. I’m tired of you leeching off of me!”
“You keep all of my food vouchers. That more than covers my share of the
rent.”
“The hell it does!” She tried again to grab the laptop out of my hands, but I
refused to let go of it. So she turned and stomped back to her room. I knew what
was coming next, so I quickly entered a command on my laptop that locked its
keyboard and erased the hard drive.
Aunt Alice returned a few seconds later with her boyfriend, Rick, who was
still half-asleep. Rick was perpetually shirtless, because he liked to show off his
impressive collection of prison tattoos. Without saying a word, he walked over
and raised a fist at me threateningly. I flinched and handed over the laptop. Then
he and Aunt Alice walked out, already discussing how much the computer might
fetch at a pawnshop.
Losing the laptop wasn’t a big deal. I had two spares stowed in my hideout.
But they weren’t nearly as fast, and I would have to reload all of my media onto
them from backup drives. A total pain in the ass. But it was my own fault. I
knew the risk of bringing anything of value back here.
The dark blue light of dawn was starting to creep in through the laundry room

window. I decided it might be a good idea to leave for school a little early today.
I dressed as quickly and quietly as possible, pulling on the worn corduroys,
baggy sweater, and oversize coat that comprised my entire winter wardrobe.
Then I put on my backpack and climbed up onto the washing machine. After
pulling on my gloves, I slid open the frost-covered window. The arctic morning
air stung my cheeks as I gazed out over the uneven sea of trailer rooftops.
My aunt’s trailer was the top unit in a “stack” twenty-two mobile homes high,
making it a level or two taller than the majority of the stacks immediately
surrounding it. The trailers on the bottom level rested on the ground, or on their
original concrete foundations, but the units stacked above them were suspended
on a reinforced modular scaffold, a haphazard metal latticework that had been
constructed piecemeal over the years.
We lived in the Portland Avenue Stacks, a sprawling hive of discolored tin
shoeboxes rusting on the shores of I-40, just west of Oklahoma City’s decaying
skyscraper core. It was a collection of over five hundred individual stacks, all
connected to each other by a makeshift network of recycled pipes, girders,
support beams, and footbridges. The spires of a dozen ancient construction
cranes (used to do the actual stacking) were positioned around the stacks’ everexpanding outer perimeter.
The top level or “roof” of the stacks was blanketed with a patchwork array of
old solar panels that provided supplemental power to the units below. A bundle
of hoses and corrugated tubing snaked up and down the side of each stack,
supplying water to each trailer and carrying away sewage (luxuries not available
in some of the other stacks scattered around the city). Very little sunlight made it
to the bottom level (known as the “floor”). The dark, narrow strips of ground
between the stacks were clogged with the skeletons of abandoned cars and
trucks, their gas tanks emptied and their exit routes blocked off long ago.
One of our neighbors, Mr. Miller, once explained to me that trailer parks like
ours had originally consisted of a few dozen mobile homes arranged in neat rows
on the ground. But after the oil crash and the onset of the energy crisis, large
cities had been flooded with refugees from surrounding suburban and rural areas,
resulting in a massive urban housing shortage. Real estate within walking
distance of a big city became far too valuable to waste on a flat plane of mobile
homes, so someone had cooked up the brilliant idea of, as Mr. Miller put it,
“stacking the sumbitches,” to maximize the use of ground space. The idea caught
on in a big way, and trailer parks across the country had quickly evolved into
“stacks” like this one—strange hybrids of shantytowns, squatter settlements, and
refugee camps. They were now scattered around the outskirts of most major
cities, each one overflowing with uprooted rednecks like my parents, who—

desperate for work, food, electricity, and reliable OASIS access—had fled their
dying small towns and had used the last of their gasoline (or their beasts of
burden) to haul their families, RVs, and trailer homes to the nearest metropolis.
Every stack in our park stood at least fifteen mobile homes high (with the
occasional RV, shipping container, Airstream trailer, or VW microbus mixed in
for variety). In recent years, many of the stacks had grown to a height of twenty
units or more. This made a lot of people nervous. Stack collapses weren’t that
uncommon, and if the scaffold supports buckled at the wrong angle, the domino
effect could bring down four or five of the neighboring stacks too.
Our trailer was near the northern edge of the stacks, which ran up to a
crumbling highway overpass. From my vantage point at the laundry room
window, I could see a thin stream of electric vehicles crawling along the cracked
asphalt, carrying goods and workers into the city. As I stared out at the grim
skyline, a bright sliver of the sun peeked over the horizon. Watching it rise, I
performed a mental ritual: Whenever I saw the sun, I reminded myself that I was
looking at a star. One of over a hundred billion stars in our galaxy. A galaxy that
was just one of billions of other galaxies in the observable universe. This helped
me keep things in perspective. I’d started doing it after watching a science
program from the early ’80s called Cosmos.
I slipped out the window as quietly as possible and, clutching the bottom of
the window frame, slid down the cold surface of the trailer’s metal siding. The
steel platform on which the trailer rested was only slightly wider and longer than
the trailer itself, leaving a ledge about a foot and a half wide all the way around.
I carefully lowered myself until my feet rested on this ledge, then reached up to
close the window behind me. I grabbed hold of a rope I’d strung there at waist
level to serve as a handhold and began to sidestep along the ledge to the corner
of the platform. From there I was able to descend the ladderlike frame of the
scaffolding. I almost always took this route when leaving or returning to my
aunt’s trailer. A rickety metal staircase was bolted to the side of the stack, but it
shook and knocked against the scaffolding, so I couldn’t use it without
announcing my presence. Bad news. In the stacks, it was best to avoid being
heard or seen, whenever possible. There were often dangerous and desperate
people about—the sort who would rob you, rape you, and then sell your organs
on the black market.
Descending the network of metal girders had always reminded me of old
platform videogames like Donkey Kong or BurgerTime. I’d seized upon this
idea a few years earlier when I coded my first Atari 2600 game (a gunter rite of
passage, like a Jedi building his first lightsaber). It was a Pitfall rip-off called
The Stacks where you had to navigate through a vertical maze of trailers,

collecting junk computers, snagging food-voucher power-ups, and avoiding
meth addicts and pedophiles on your way to school. My game was a lot more fun
than the real thing.
As I climbed down, I paused next to the Airstream trailer three units below
ours, where my friend Mrs. Gilmore lived. She was a sweet old lady in her midseventies, and she always seemed to get up ridiculously early. I peeked in her
window and saw her shuffling around in her kitchen, making breakfast. She
spotted me after a few seconds, and her eyes lit up.
“Wade!” she said, cracking open her window. “Good morning, my dear boy.”
“Good morning, Mrs. G,” I said. “I hope I didn’t startle you.”
“Not at all,” she said. She pulled her robe tight against the draft coming in the
window. “It’s freezing out there! Why don’t you come in and have some
breakfast? I’ve got some soy bacon. And these powdered eggs aren’t too bad, if
you put enough salt on them.…”
“Thanks, but I can’t this morning, Mrs. G. I have to get to school.”
“All right. Rain check, then.” She blew me a kiss and started to close the
window. “Try not to break your neck climbing around out there, OK, SpiderMan?”
“Will do. See ya later, Mrs. G.” I waved good-bye to her and continued my
descent.
Mrs. Gilmore was a total sweetheart. She let me crash on her couch when I
needed to, although it was hard for me to sleep there because of all her cats. Mrs.
G was super-religious and spent most of her time in the OASIS, sitting in the
congregation of one of those big online mega-churches, singing hymns, listening
to sermons, and taking virtual tours of the Holy Land. I fixed her ancient OASIS
console whenever it went on the fritz, and in return, she answered my endless
questions about what it had been like for her to grow up during the 1980s. She
knew the coolest bits of ’80s trivia—stuff you couldn’t learn from books or
movies. She was always praying for me too. Trying her hardest to save my soul.
I never had the heart to tell her that I thought organized religion was a total
crock. It was a pleasant fantasy that gave her hope and kept her going—which
was exactly what the Hunt was for me. To quote the Almanac: “People who live
in glass houses should shut the fuck up.”
When I reached the bottom level, I jumped off the scaffold and dropped the
few remaining feet to the ground. My rubber boots crunched into the slush and
frozen mud. It was still pretty dark down here, so I took out my flashlight and
headed east, weaving my way through the dark maze, doing my best to remain
unseen while being careful to avoid tripping over a shopping cart, engine block,
or one of the other pieces of junk littering the narrow alleys between the stacks. I

rarely saw anyone out at this time of the morning. The commuter shuttles ran
only a few times a day, so the residents lucky enough to have a job would
already be waiting at the bus stop by the highway. Most of them worked as day
laborers in the giant factory farms that surrounded the city.
After walking about half a mile, I reached a giant mound of old cars and
trucks piled haphazardly along the stacks’ eastern perimeter. Decades ago, the
cranes had cleared the park of as many abandoned vehicles as possible, to make
room for even more stacks, and they’d dumped them in huge piles like this one
all around the settlement’s perimeter. Many of them were nearly as tall as the
stacks themselves.
I walked to the edge of the pile, and after a quick glance around to make sure I
wasn’t being watched or followed, I turned sideways to squeeze through a gap
between two crushed cars. From there, I ducked, clambered, and sidestepped my
way farther and farther into the ramshackle mountain of twisted metal, until I
reached a small open space at the rear of a buried cargo van. Only the rear third
of the van was visible. The rest was concealed by the other vehicles stacked on
and around it. Two overturned pickup trucks lay across the van’s roof at different
angles, but most of their weight was supported by the cars stacked on either side,
creating a kind of protective arch that had prevented the van from being crushed
by the mountain of vehicles piled above it.
I pulled out a chain I kept around my neck, on which there hung a single key.
In a stroke of luck, this key had still been hanging from the van’s ignition when
I’d first discovered it. Many of these vehicles had been in working condition
when they were abandoned. Their owners had simply no longer been able to
afford fuel for them, so they’d just parked them and walked away.
I pocketed my flashlight and unlocked the van’s rear right door. It opened
about a foot and a half, giving me just enough room to squeeze inside. I pulled
the door closed behind me and locked it again. The van’s rear doors had no
windows, so I was hunched over in total darkness for a second, until my fingers
found the old power strip I’d duct-taped to the ceiling. I flipped it on, and an old
desk lamp flooded the tiny space with light.
The crumpled green roof of a compact car covered the crushed opening where
the windshield had been, but the damage to the van’s front end didn’t extend
beyond the cab. The rest of the interior remained intact. Someone had removed
all of the van’s seats (probably to use as furniture), leaving a small “room” about
four feet wide, four feet high, and nine feet long.
This was my hideout.
I’d discovered it four years earlier, while searching for discarded computer
parts. When I first opened the door and gazed into the van’s darkened interior, I

knew right away that I’d found something of immeasurable value: privacy. This
was a place no one else knew about, where I wouldn’t have to worry about
getting hassled or slapped around by my aunt or whatever loser she was
currently dating. I could keep my things here without worrying they’d be stolen.
And, most important, it was a place where I could access the OASIS in peace.
The van was my refuge. My Batcave. My Fortress of Solitude. It was where I
attended school, did my homework, read books, watched movies, and played
videogames. It was also where I conducted my ongoing quest to find Halliday’s
Easter egg.
I’d covered the walls, floor, and ceiling with Styrofoam egg cartons and pieces
of carpeting in an effort to soundproof the van as much as possible. Several
cardboard boxes of busted laptops and computer parts sat in the corner, next to a
rack of old car batteries and a modified exercise bike I’d rigged up as a
recharger. The only furniture was a folding lawn chair.
I dropped my backpack, shrugged off my coat, and hopped on the exercise
bike. Charging the batteries was usually the only physical exercise I got each
day. I pedaled until the meter said the batteries had a full charge, then sat down
in my chair and switched on the small electric heater I kept beside it. I pulled off
my gloves and rubbed my hands in front of the filaments as they began to glow
bright orange. I couldn’t leave the heater on for very long, or it would drain the
batteries.
I opened the rat-proof metal box where I kept my food cache and took out
some bottled water and a packet of powdered milk. I mixed these together in a
bowl, then dumped in a generous serving of Fruit Rocks cereal. Once I’d wolfed
it down, I retrieved an old plastic Star Trek lunch box I kept hidden under the
van’s crushed dashboard. Inside were my school-issued OASIS console, haptic
gloves, and visor. These items were, by far, the most valuable things I owned.
Far too valuable to carry around with me.
I pulled on my elastic haptic gloves and flexed my fingers to make sure none
of the joints was sticking. Then I grabbed my OASIS console, a flat black
rectangle about the size of a paperback book. It had a wireless network antenna
built into it, but the reception inside the van was for shit, since it was buried
under a huge mound of dense metal. So I’d rigged up an external antenna and
mounted it on the hood of a car at the top of the junk pile. The antenna cable
snaked up through a hole I’d punched in the van’s ceiling. I plugged it into a port
on the side of the console, then slipped on my visor. It fit snugly around my eyes
like a pair of swimmer’s goggles, blocking out all external light. Small earbuds
extended from the visor’s temples and automatically plugged themselves into my
ears. The visor also housed two built-in stereo voice microphones to pick up

everything I said.
I powered on the console and initiated the log-in sequence. I saw a brief flash
of red as the visor scanned my retinas. Then I cleared my throat and said my login pass phrase, being careful to enunciate: “You have been recruited by the Star
League to defend the Frontier against Xur and the Ko-Dan Armada.”
My pass phrase was also verified, along with my voice pattern, and then I was
logged in. The following text appeared, superimposed in the center of my virtual
display:
Identity verification successful.
Welcome to the OASIS, Parzival!
Login Completed: 07:53:21 OST-2.10.2045
As the text faded away, it was replaced by a short message, just three words
long. This message had been embedded in the log-in sequence by James
Halliday himself, when he’d first programmed the OASIS, as an homage to the
simulation’s direct ancestors, the coin-operated videogames of his youth. These
three words were always the last thing an OASIS user saw before leaving the
real world and entering the virtual one:
READY PLAYER ONE

My avatar materialized in front of my locker on the second floor of my high
school—the exact spot where I’d been standing when I’d logged out the night
before.
I glanced up and down the hallway. My virtual surroundings looked almost
(but not quite) real. Everything inside the OASIS was beautifully rendered in
three dimensions. Unless you pulled focus and stopped to examine your
surroundings more closely, it was easy to forget that everything you were seeing
was computer-generated. And that was with my crappy school-issued OASIS
console. I’d heard that if you accessed the simulation with a new state-of-the-art
immersion rig, it was almost impossible to tell the OASIS from reality.
I touched my locker door and it popped open with a soft metallic click. The
inside was sparsely decorated. A picture of Princess Leia posing with a blaster
pistol. A group photo of the members of Monty Python in their Holy Grail
costumes. James Halliday’s Time magazine cover. I reached up and tapped the
stack of textbooks on the locker’s top shelf and they vanished, then reappeared
in my avatar’s item inventory.
Aside from my textbooks, my avatar had only a few meager possessions: a
flashlight, an iron shortsword, a small bronze shield, and a suit of banded leather
armor. These items were all nonmagical and of low quality, but they were the
best I could afford. Items in the OASIS had just as much value as things in the
real world (sometimes more), and you couldn’t pay for them with food vouchers.
The OASIS credit was the coin of the realm, and in these dark times, it was also
one of the world’s most stable currencies, valued higher than the dollar, pound,
euro, or yen.
A small mirror was mounted inside my locker door, and I caught a glimpse of
my virtual self as I closed it. I’d designed my avatar’s face and body to look,
more or less, like my own. My avatar had a slightly smaller nose than me, and he
was taller. And thinner. And more muscular. And he didn’t have any teenage
acne. But aside from these minor details, we looked more or less identical. The

school’s strictly enforced dress code required that all student avatars be human,
and of the same gender and age as the student. No giant two-headed
hermaphrodite demon unicorn avatars were allowed. Not on school grounds,
anyway.
You could give your OASIS avatar any name you liked, as long as it was
unique. Meaning you had to pick a name that hadn’t already been taken by
someone else. Your avatar’s name was also your e-mail address and chat ID, so
you wanted it to be cool and easy to remember. Celebrities had been known to
pay huge sums of money to buy an avatar name they wanted from a cybersquatter who had already reserved it.
When I’d first created my OASIS account, I’d named my avatar
Wade_the_Great. After that, I kept changing it every few months, usually to
something equally ridiculous. But my avatar had now had the same name for
over five years. On the day the Hunt began, the day I’d decided to become a
gunter, I’d renamed my avatar Parzival, after the knight of Arthurian legend who
had found the Holy Grail. The other more common spellings of that knight’s
name, Perceval and Percival, had already been taken by other users. But I
preferred the name Parzival, anyway. I thought it had a nice ring to it.
People rarely used their real names online. Anonymity was one of the major
perks of the OASIS. Inside the simulation, no one knew who you really were,
unless you wanted them to. Much of the OASIS’s popularity and culture were
built around this fact. Your real name, fingerprints, and retinal patterns were
stored in your OASIS account, but Gregarious Simulation Systems kept that
information encrypted and confidential. Even GSS’s own employees couldn’t
look up an avatar’s true identity. Back when Halliday was still running the
company, GSS had won the right to keep every OASIS user’s identity private in
a landmark Supreme Court ruling.
When I’d first enrolled in the OASIS public school system, I was required to
give them my real name, avatar name, mailing address, and Social Security
number. That information was stored in my student profile, but only my
principal had access to that. None of my teachers or fellow students knew who I
really was, and vice versa.
Students weren’t allowed to use their avatar names while they were at school.
This was to prevent teachers from having to say ridiculous things like
“Pimp_Grease, please pay attention!” or “BigWang69, would you stand up and
give us your book report?” Instead, students were required to use their real first
names, followed by a number, to differentiate them from other students with the
same name. When I enrolled, there were already two other students at my school
with the first name Wade, so I’d been assigned the student ID of Wade3. That

name floated above my avatar’s head whenever I was on school grounds.
The school bell rang and a warning flashed in the corner of my display,
informing me that I had forty minutes until the start of first period. I began to
walk my avatar down the hall, using a series of subtle hand motions to control its
movements and actions. I could also use voice commands to move around, if my
hands were otherwise occupied.
I strolled in the direction of my World History classroom, smiling and waving
to the familiar faces I passed. I was going to miss this place when I graduated in
a few months. I wasn’t looking forward to leaving school. I didn’t have the
money to attend college, not even one in the OASIS, and my grades weren’t
good enough for a scholarship. My only plan after graduation was to become a
full-time gunter. I didn’t have much choice. Winning the contest was my one
chance of escaping the stacks. Unless I wanted to sign a five-year indenturement
contract with some corporation, and that was about as appealing to me as rolling
around in broken glass in my birthday suit.
As I continued down the hallway, other students began to materialize in front
of their lockers, ghostly apparitions that rapidly solidified. The sound of
chattering teenagers began to echo up and down the corridor. Before long, I
heard an insult hurled in my direction.
“Hey, hey! If it isn’t Wade Three!” I heard a voice shout. I turned and saw
Todd13, an obnoxious avatar I recognized from my Algebra II class. He was
standing with several of his friends. “Great outfit, slick,” he said. “Where did
you snag the sweet threads?”
My avatar was wearing a black T-shirt and blue jeans, one of the free default
skins you could select when you created your account. Like his Cro-Magnon
friends, Todd13 wore an expensive designer skin, probably purchased in some
offworld mall.
“Your mom bought them for me,” I retorted without breaking my stride. “Tell
her I said thanks, the next time you stop at home to breast-feed and pick up your
allowance.” Childish, I know. But virtual or not, this was still high school—the
more childish an insult, the more effective it was.
My jab elicited laughter from a few of his friends and the other students
standing nearby. Todd13 scowled and his face actually turned red—a sign that he
hadn’t bothered to turn off his account’s real-time emotion feature, which made
your avatar mirror your facial expressions and body language. He was about to
reply, but I muted him first, so I didn’t hear what he said. I just smiled and
continued on my way.
The ability to mute my peers was one of my favorite things about attending
school online, and I took advantage of it almost daily. The best thing about it was

that they could see that you’d muted them, and they couldn’t do a damn thing
about it. There was never any fighting on school grounds. The simulation simply
didn’t allow it. The entire planet of Ludus was a no-PvP zone, meaning that no
player-versus-player combat was permitted. At this school, the only real
weapons were words, so I’d become skilled at wielding them.

I’d attended school in the real world up until the sixth grade. It hadn’t been a
very pleasant experience. I was a painfully shy, awkward kid, with low selfesteem and almost no social skills—a side effect of spending most of my
childhood inside the OASIS. Online, I didn’t have a problem talking to people or
making friends. But in the real world, interacting with other people—especially
kids my own age—made me a nervous wreck. I never knew how to act or what
to say, and when I did work up the courage to speak, I always seemed to say the
wrong thing.
My appearance was part of the problem. I was overweight, and had been for
as long as I could remember. My bankrupt diet of government-subsidized sugarand-starch-laden food was a contributing factor, but I was also an OASIS addict,
so the only exercise I usually got back then was running away from bullies
before and after school. To make matters worse, my limited wardrobe consisted
entirely of ill-fitting clothes from thrift stores and donation bins—the social
equivalent of having a bull’s-eye painted on my forehead.
Even so, I tried my best to fit in. Year after year, my eyes would scan the
lunchroom like a T-1000, searching for a clique that might accept me. But even
the other outcasts wanted nothing to do with me. I was too weird, even for the
weirdos. And girls? Talking to girls was out of the question. To me, they were
like some exotic alien species, both beautiful and terrifying. Whenever I got near
one of them, I invariably broke out in a cold sweat and lost the ability to speak in
complete sentences.
For me, school had been a Darwinian exercise. A daily gauntlet of ridicule,
abuse, and isolation. By the time I entered sixth grade, I was beginning to
wonder if I’d be able to maintain my sanity until graduation, still six long years
away.
Then, one glorious day, our principal announced that any student with a
passing grade-point average could apply for a transfer to the new OASIS public
school system. The real public school system, the one run by the government,
had been an underfunded, overcrowded train wreck for decades. And now the
conditions at many schools had gotten so terrible that every kid with half a brain
was being encouraged to stay at home and attend school online. I nearly broke

my neck sprinting to the school office to submit my application. It was accepted,
and I transferred to OASIS Public School #1873 the following semester.
Prior to my transfer, my OASIS avatar had never left Incipio, the planet at the
center of Sector One where new avatars were spawned at the time of their
creation. There wasn’t much to do on Incipio except chat with other noobs or
shop in one of the giant virtual malls that covered the planet. If you wanted to go
somewhere more interesting, you had to pay a teleportation fare to get there, and
that cost money, something I didn’t have. So my avatar was stranded on Incipio.
That is, until my new school e-mailed me a teleportation voucher to cover the
cost of my avatar’s transport to Ludus, the planet where all of the OASIS public
schools were located.
There were hundreds of school campuses here on Ludus, spread out evenly
across the planet’s surface. The schools were all identical, because the same
construction code was copied and pasted into a different location whenever a
new school was needed. And since the buildings were just pieces of software,
their design wasn’t limited by monetary constraints, or even by the laws of
physics. So every school was a grand palace of learning, with polished marble
hallways, cathedral-like classrooms, zero-g gymnasiums, and virtual libraries
containing every (school board–approved) book ever written.
On my first day at OPS #1873, I thought I’d died and gone to heaven. Now,
instead of running a gauntlet of bullies and drug addicts on my walk to school
each morning, I went straight to my hideout and stayed there all day. Best of all,
in the OASIS, no one could tell that I was fat, that I had acne, or that I wore the
same shabby clothes every week. Bullies couldn’t pelt me with spitballs, give me
atomic wedgies, or pummel me by the bike rack after school. No one could even
touch me. In here, I was safe.

When I arrived in my World History classroom, several students were already
seated at their desks. Their avatars all sat motionless, with their eyes closed. This
was a signal that they were “engaged,” meaning they were currently on phone
calls, browsing the Web, or logged into chat rooms. It was poor OASIS etiquette
to try to talk to an engaged avatar. They usually just ignored you, and you’d get
an automated message telling you to piss off.
I took a seat at my desk and tapped the Engage icon at the edge of my display.
My own avatar’s eyes slid shut, but I could still see my surroundings. I tapped
another icon, and a large two-dimensional Web browser window appeared,
suspended in space directly in front of me. Windows like this one were visible to
only my avatar, so no one could read over my shoulder (unless I selected the

option to allow it).
My homepage was set to the Hatchery, one of the more popular gunter
message forums. The Hatchery’s site interface was designed to look and operate
like an old pre-Internet dial-up bulletin board system, complete with the screech
of a 300-baud modem during the log-in sequence. Very cool. I spent a few
minutes scanning the most recent message threads, taking in the latest gunter
news and rumors. I rarely posted anything to the boards, even though I made
sure to check them every day. I didn’t see much of interest this morning. The
usual gunter clan flame wars. Ongoing arguments about the “correct”
interpretation of some cryptic passage in Anorak’s Almanac. High-level avatars
bragging about some new magic item or artifact they’d obtained. This crap had
been going on for years now. In the absence of any real progress, gunter
subculture had become mired in bravado, bullshit, and pointless infighting. It
was sad, really.
My favorite message threads were those devoted to bashing the Sixers.
“Sixers” was the derogatory nickname gunters had given to employees of
Innovative Online Industries. IOI (pronounced eye-oh-eye) was a global
communications conglomerate and the world’s largest Internet service provider.
A large portion of IOI’s business centered around providing access to the OASIS
and on selling goods and services inside it. For this reason, IOI had attempted
several hostile takeovers of Gregarious Simulation Systems, all of which had
failed. Now they were trying to seize control of GSS by exploiting a loophole in
Halliday’s will.
IOI had created a new department within the company that they called their
“Oology Division.” (“Oology” was originally defined as “the science of studying
birds’ eggs,” but in recent years it had taken on a second meaning: the “science”
of searching for Halliday’s Easter egg.) IOI’s Oology Division had but one
purpose: to win Halliday’s contest and seize control of his fortune, his company,
and the OASIS itself.
Like most gunters, I was horrified at the thought of IOI taking control of the
OASIS. The company’s PR machine had made its intentions crystal clear. IOI
believed that Halliday never properly monetized his creation, and they wanted to
remedy that. They would start charging a monthly fee for access to the
simulation. They would plaster advertisements on every visible surface. User
anonymity and free speech would become things of the past. The moment IOI
took it over, the OASIS would cease to be the open-source virtual utopia I’d
grown up in. It would become a corporate-run dystopia, an overpriced theme
park for wealthy elitists.
IOI required its egg hunters, which it referred to as “oologists,” to use their

employee numbers as their OASIS avatar names. These numbers were all six
digits in length, and they also began with the numeral “6,” so everyone began
calling them the Sixers. These days, most gunters referred to them as “the
Sux0rz.” (Because they sucked.)
To become a Sixer, you had to sign a contract stipulating, among other things,
that if you found Halliday’s egg, the prize would become the sole property of
your employer. In return, IOI gave you a bimonthly paycheck, food, lodging,
health-care benefits, and a retirement plan. The company also provided your
avatar with high-end armor, vehicles, and weapons, and covered all of your
teleportation fares. Joining the Sixers was a lot like joining the military.
Sixers weren’t hard to spot, because they all looked identical. They were all
required to use the same hulking male avatar (regardless of the operator’s true
gender), with close-cropped dark hair and facial features left at the system
default settings. And they all wore the same navy blue uniform. The only way to
tell these corporate drones apart was by checking the six-digit employee number
stamped on their right breast, just beneath the IOI corporate logo.
Like most gunters, I loathed the Sixers and was disgusted by their very
existence. By hiring an army of contract egg hunters, IOI was perverting the
entire spirit of the contest. Of course, it could be argued that all the gunters who
had joined clans were doing the same thing. There were now hundreds of gunter
clans, some with thousands of members, all working together to find the egg.
Each clan was bound by an ironclad legal agreement stating that if one clan
member won the contest, all members would share the prize. Solos like me
didn’t care much for the clans, either, but we still respected them as fellow
gunters—unlike the Sixers, whose goal was to hand the OASIS over to an evil
multinational conglomerate intent on ruining it.
My generation had never known a world without the OASIS. To us, it was
much more than a game or an entertainment platform. It had been an integral
part of our lives for as far back as we could remember. We’d been born into an
ugly world, and the OASIS was our one happy refuge. The thought of the
simulation being privatized and homogenized by IOI horrified us in a way that
those born before its introduction found difficult to understand. For us, it was
like someone threatening to take away the sun, or charge a fee to look up at the
sky.
The Sixers gave gunters a common enemy, and Sixer bashing was a favorite
pastime in our forums and chat rooms. A lot of high-level gunters had a strict
policy of killing (or trying to kill) every Sixer who crossed their path. Several
websites were devoted to tracking Sixer activities and movements, and some
gunters spent more time hunting the Sixers than they did searching for the egg.

The bigger clans actually held a yearly competition called “Eighty-Six the
Sux0rz,” with a prize for the clan who managed to kill the largest number of
them.
After checking a few other gunter forums, I tapped a bookmark icon for one
of my favorite websites, Arty’s Missives, the blog of a female gunter named
Art3mis (pronounced “Artemis”). I’d discovered it about three years ago and had
been a loyal reader ever since. She posted these great rambling essays about her
search for Halliday’s egg, which she called a “maddening MacGuffin hunt.” She
wrote with an endearing, intelligent voice, and her entries were filled with selfdeprecating humor and witty, sardonic asides. In addition to posting her (often
hysterical) interpretations of passages in the Almanac, she also linked to the
books, movies, TV shows, and music she was currently studying as part of her
Halliday research. I assumed that all of these posts were filled with misdirection
and misinformation, but they were still highly entertaining.
It probably goes without saying that I had a massive cyber-crush on Art3mis.
She occasionally posted screenshots of her raven-haired avatar, and I
sometimes (always) saved them to a folder on my hard drive. Her avatar had a
pretty face, but it wasn’t unnaturally perfect. In the OASIS, you got used to
seeing freakishly beautiful faces on everyone. But Art3mis’s features didn’t look
as though they’d been selected from a beauty drop-down menu on some avatar
creation template. Her face had the distinctive look of a real person’s, as if her
true features had been scanned in and mapped onto her avatar. Big hazel eyes,
rounded cheekbones, a pointy chin, and a perpetual smirk. I found her
unbearably attractive.
Art3mis’s body was also somewhat unusual. In the OASIS, you usually saw
one of two body shapes on female avatars: the absurdly thin yet wildly popular
supermodel frame, or the top-heavy, wasp-waisted porn starlet physique (which
looked even less natural in the OASIS than it did in the real world). But
Art3mis’s frame was short and Rubenesque. All curves.
I knew the crush I had on Art3mis was both silly and ill-advised. What did I
really know about her? She’d never revealed her true identity, of course. Or her
age or location in the real world. There was no telling what she really looked
like. She could be fifteen or fifty. A lot of gunters even questioned whether she
was really female, but I wasn’t one of them. Probably because I couldn’t bear the
idea that the girl with whom I was virtually smitten might actually be some
middle-aged dude named Chuck, with back hair and male-pattern baldness.
In the years since I’d first started reading Arty’s Missives, it had become one
of the most popular blogs on the Internet, now logging several million hits a day.
And Art3mis was now something of a celebrity, at least in gunter circles. But

fame hadn’t gone to her head. Her writing was still as funny and self-deprecating
as ever. Her newest blog post was titled “The John Hughes Blues,” and it was an
in-depth treatise on her six favorite John Hughes teen movies, which she divided
into two separate trilogies: The “Dorky Girl Fantasies” trilogy (Sixteen Candles,
Pretty in Pink, and Some Kind of Wonderful) and the “Dorky Boy Fantasies”
trilogy (The Breakfast Club, Weird Science, and Ferris Bueller’s Day Off).
Just as I’d finished reading it, an instant message window popped up on my
display. It was my best friend, Aech. (OK, if you want to split hairs, he was my
only friend, not counting Mrs. Gilmore.)
Aech: Top o’ the morning, amigo.
Parzival: Hola, compadre.
Aech: What are you up to?
Parzival: Just surfing the turf. You?
Aech: Got the Basement online. Come and hang out before school, fool.
Parzival: Sweet! I’ll be there in a sec.
I closed the IM window and checked the time. I still had about half an hour
until class started. I grinned and tapped a small door icon at the edge of my
display, then selected Aech’s chat room from my list of favorites.

The system verified that I was on the chat room’s access list and allowed me
to enter. My view of the classroom shrank from the limits of my peripheral
vision to a small thumbnail window in the lower right of my display, allowing
me to monitor what was in front of my avatar. The rest of my field of vision was
now filled with the interior of Aech’s chat room. My avatar appeared just inside
the “entrance,” a door at the top of a carpeted staircase. The door didn’t lead
anywhere. It didn’t even open. This was because the Basement and its contents
didn’t exist as a part of the OASIS. Chat rooms were stand-alone simulations—
temporary virtual spaces that avatars could access from anywhere in OASIS. My
avatar wasn’t actually “in” the chat room. It only appeared that way.
Wade3/Parzival was still sitting in my World History classroom with his eyes
closed. Logging into a chat room was a little like being in two places at once.
Aech had named his chat room the Basement. He’d programmed it to look
like a large suburban rec room, circa the late 1980s. Old movie and comic book
posters covered the wood-paneled walls. A vintage RCA television stood in the
center of the room, hooked up to a Betamax VCR, a LaserDisc player, and
several vintage videogame consoles. Bookshelves lined the far wall, filled with
role-playing game supplements and back issues of Dragon magazine.
Hosting a chat room this large wasn’t cheap, but Aech could afford it. He
made quite a bit of dough competing in televised PvP arena games after school
and on the weekends. Aech was one of the highest-ranked combatants in the
OASIS, in both the Deathmatch and Capture the Flag leagues. He was even
more famous than Art3mis.
Over the past few years, the Basement had become a highly exclusive hangout
for elite gunters. Aech granted access only to people he deemed worthy, so being
invited to hang out in the Basement was a big honor, especially for a third-level
nobody like me.
As I descended the staircase, I saw a few dozen other gunters milling around,
with avatars that varied wildly in appearance. There were humans, cyborgs,

demons, dark elves, Vulcans, and vampires. Most of them were gathered around
the row of old arcade games against the wall. A few others stood by the ancient
stereo (currently blasting “The Wild Boys” by Duran Duran), browsing through
Aech’s giant rack of vintage cassette tapes.
Aech himself was sprawled on one of the chat room’s three couches, which
were arrayed in a U-shape in front of the TV. Aech’s avatar was a tall, broadshouldered Caucasian male with dark hair and brown eyes. I’d asked him once if
he looked anything like his avatar in real life, and he’d jokingly replied, “Yes.
But in real life, I’m even more handsome.”
As I walked over, he glanced up from the Intellivision game he was playing.
His distinctive Cheshire grin stretched from ear to ear. “Z!” he shouted. “What
is up, amigo?” He stretched out his right hand and gave me five as I dropped
onto the couch opposite him. Aech had started calling me “Z” shortly after I met
him. He liked to give people single-letter nicknames. Aech pronounced his own
avatar’s name just like the letter “H.”
“What up, Humperdinck?” I said. This was a game we played. I always called
him by some random H name, like Harry, Hubert, Henry, or Hogan. I was
making guesses at his real first name, which, he’d once confided to me, began
with the letter “H.”
I’d known Aech for a little over three years. He was also a student on Ludus, a
senior at OPS #1172, which was on the opposite side of the planet from my
school. We’d met one weekend in a public gunter chat room and hit it off
immediately, because we shared all of the same interests. Which is to say one
interest: a total, all-consuming obsession with Halliday and his Easter egg. A few
minutes into our first conversation, I knew Aech was the real deal, an elite
gunter with some serious mental kung fu. He had his ’80s trivia down cold, and
not just the canon stuff, either. He was a true Halliday scholar. And he’d
apparently seen the same qualities in me, because he’d given me his contact card
and invited me to hang out in the Basement whenever I liked. He’d been my
closest friend ever since.
Over the years, a friendly rivalry had gradually developed between us. We did
a lot of trash-talking about which one of us would get his name up on the
Scoreboard first. We were constantly trying to out-geek each other with our
knowledge of obscure gunter trivia. Sometimes we even conducted our research
together. This usually consisted of watching cheesy ’80s movies and TV shows
here in his chat room. We also played a lot of videogames, of course. Aech and I
had wasted countless hours on two-player classics like Contra, Golden Axe,
Heavy Barrel, Smash TV, and Ikari Warriors. Aside from yours truly, Aech was
the best all-around gamer I’d ever encountered. We were evenly matched at most

games, but he could trounce me at certain titles, especially anything in the firstperson shooter genre. That was his area of expertise, after all.
I didn’t know anything about who Aech was in the real world, but I got the
sense his home life wasn’t that great. Like me, he seemed to spend every waking
moment logged into the OASIS. And even though we’d never actually met in
person, he’d told me more than once that I was his best friend, so I assumed he
was just as isolated and lonely as I was.
“So what did you do after you bailed last night?” he asked, tossing me the
other Intellivision controller. We’d hung out here in his chat room for a few
hours the previous evening, watching old Japanese monster movies.
“Nada,” I said. “Went home and brushed up on a few classic coin-ops.”
“Unnecessary.”
“Yeah. But I was in the mood.” I didn’t ask him what he’d done the night
before, and he didn’t volunteer any details. I knew he’d probably gone to Gygax,
or somewhere equally awesome, to speedrun through a few quests and rack up
some XPs. He just didn’t want to rub it in. Aech could afford to spend a fair
amount of time off-world, following up leads and searching for the Copper Key.
But he never lorded this over me, or ridiculed me for not having enough dough
to teleport anywhere. And he never insulted me by offering to loan me a few
credits. It was an unspoken rule among gunters: If you were a solo, you didn’t
want or need help, from anyone. Gunters who wanted help joined a clan, and
Aech and I both agreed that clans were for suck-asses and poseurs. We’d both
vowed to remain solos for life. We still occasionally had discussions about the
egg, but these conversations were always guarded, and we were careful to avoid
talking about specifics.
After I beat Aech at three rounds of Tron: Deadly Discs, he threw down his
Intellivision controller in disgust and grabbed a magazine off the floor. It was an
old issue of Starlog. I recognized Rutger Hauer on the cover, in a Ladyhawke
promotional photo.
“Starlog, eh?” I said, nodding my approval.
“Yep. Downloaded every single issue from the Hatchery’s archive. Still
working my way through ’em. I was just reading this great piece on Ewoks: The
Battle for Endor.”
“Made for TV. Released in 1985,” I recited. Star Wars trivia was one of my
specialties. “Total garbage. A real low point in the history of the Wars.”
“Says you, assface. It has some great moments.”
“No,” I said, shaking my head. “It doesn’t. It’s even worse than that first
Ewok flick, Caravan of Courage. They shoulda called it Caravan of Suck.”
Aech rolled his eyes and went back to reading. He wasn’t going to take the

bait. I eyed the magazine’s cover. “Hey, can I have a look at that when you’re
done?”
He grinned. “Why? So you can read the article on Ladyhawke?”
“Maybe.”
“Man, you just love that crapburger, don’t you?”
“Blow me, Aech.”
“How many times have you seen that sapfest? I know you’ve made me sit
through it at least twice.” He was baiting me now. He knew Ladyhawke was one
of my guilty pleasures, and that I’d seen it over two dozen times.
“I was doing you a favor by making you watch it, noob,” I said. I shoved a
new cartridge into the Intellivision console and started up a single-player game
of Astrosmash. “You’ll thank me one day. Wait and see. Ladyhawke is canon.”
“Canon” was the term we used to classify any movie, book, game, song, or
TV show of which Halliday was known to have been a fan.
“Surely, you must be joking,” Aech said.
“No, I am not joking. And don’t call me Shirley.”
He lowered the magazine and leaned forward. “There is no way Halliday was
a fan of Ladyhawke. I guarantee it.”
“Where’s your proof, dipshit?” I asked.
“The man had taste. That’s all the proof I need.”
“Then please explain to me why he owned Ladyhawke on both VHS and
LaserDisc?” A list of all the films in Halliday’s collection at the time of his death
was included in the appendices of Anorak’s Almanac. We both had the list
memorized.
“The guy was a billionaire! He owned millions of movies, most of which he
probably never even watched! He had DVDs of Howard the Duck and Krull, too.
That doesn’t mean he liked them, asshat. And it sure as hell doesn’t make them
canon.”
“It’s not really up for debate, Homer,” I said. “Ladyhawke is an eighties
classic.”
“It’s fucking lame, is what it is! The swords look like they were made out of
tinfoil. And that soundtrack is epically lame. Full of synthesizers and shit. By the
motherfucking Alan Parsons Project! Lame-o-rama! Beyond lame. Highlander II
lame.”
“Hey!” I feigned hurling my Intellivision controller at him. “Now you’re just
being insulting! Ladyhawke’s cast alone makes the film canon! Roy Batty! Ferris
Bueller! And the dude who played Professor Falken in WarGames!” I searched
my memory for the actor’s name. “John Wood! Reunited with Matthew
Broderick!”

“A real low point in both of their careers,” he said, laughing. He loved arguing
about old movies, even more than I did. The other gunters in the chat room were
now starting to form a small crowd around us to listen in. Our arguments were
often high in entertainment value.
“You must be stoned!” I shouted. “Ladyhawke was directed by Richard
fucking Donner! The Goonies? Superman: The Movie? You’re saying that guy
sucks?”
“I don’t care if Spielberg directed it. It’s a chick flick disguised as a swordand-sorcery picture. The only genre film with less balls is probably … freakin’
Legend. Anyone who actually enjoys Ladyhawke is a bona fide USDA-choice
pussy!”
Laughter from the peanut gallery. I was actually getting a little pissed off now.
I was a big fan of Legend too, and Aech knew it.
“Oh, so I’m a pussy? You’re the one with the Ewok fetish!” I snatched the
Starlog out of his hands and threw it against a Revenge of the Jedi poster on the
wall. “I suppose you think your extensive knowledge of Ewok culture is gonna
help you find the egg?”
“Don’t start on the Endorians again, man,” he said, holding up an index finger.
“I’ve warned you. I will ban your ass. I swear.” I knew this was a hollow threat,
so I was about to push the Ewok thing even further, maybe give him some crap
for referring to them as “Endorians.” But just then, a new arrival materialized on
the staircase. A total lamer by the name of I-r0k. I let out a groan. I-r0k and Aech
attended the same school and had a few classes together, but I still couldn’t
figure out why Aech had granted him access to the Basement. I-r0k fancied
himself an elite gunter, but he was nothing but an obnoxious poseur. Sure, he did
a lot of teleporting around the OASIS, completing quests and leveling up his
avatar, but he didn’t actually know anything. And he was always brandishing an
oversize plasma rifle the size of a snowmobile. Even in chat rooms, where it was
totally pointless. The guy had no sense of decorum.
“Are you cocks arguing about Star Wars again?” he said, descending the steps
and walking over to join the crowd around us. “That shit is so played out, yo.”
I turned to Aech. “If you want to ban someone, why don’t you start with this
clown?” I hit Reset on the Intellivision and started another game.
“Shut your hole, Penis-ville!” I-r0k replied, using his favorite
mispronunciation of my avatar’s name. “He doesn’t ban me ’cause he knows I’m
elite! Ain’t that right, Aech?”
“No,” Aech said, rolling his eyes. “That ain’t right. You’re about as elite as
my great-grandmother. And she’s dead.”
“Screw you, Aech! And your dead grandma!”

“Gee, I-r0k,” I muttered. “You always manage to elevate the intelligence level
of the conversation. The whole room just lights up the moment you arrive.”
“So sorry to upset you, Captain No-Credits,” I-r0k said. “Hey, shouldn’t you
be on Incipio panhandling for change right now?” He reached for the second
Intellivision controller, but I snatched it up and tossed it to Aech.
He scowled at me. “Prick.”
“Poseur.”
“Poseur? Penis-ville is calling me a poseur?” He turned to address the small
crowd. “This chump is so broke that he has to bum rides to Greyhawk, just so he
can kill kobolds for copper pieces! And he’s calling me a poseur!”
This elicited a few snickers from the crowd, and I felt my face turn red under
my visor. Once, about a year ago, I’d made the mistake of hitching a ride offworld with I-r0k to try to gain a few experience points. After dropping me in a
low-level quest area on Greyhawk, the jerk had followed me. I’d spent the next
few hours slaying a small band of kobolds, waiting for them to respawn, and
then slaying them again, over and over. My avatar was still only first level at the
time, and it was one of the only safe ways for me to level up. I-r0k had taken
several screenshots of my avatar that night and labeled them “Penis-ville the
Mighty Kobold Slayer.” Then he’d posted them to the Hatchery. He still brought
it up every chance he got. He was never going to let me live it down.
“That’s right, I called you a poseur, poseur.” I stood and got up in his grille.
“You’re an ignorant know-nothing twink. Just because you’re fourteenth-level, it
doesn’t make you a gunter. You actually have to possess some knowledge.”
“Word,” Aech said, nodding his agreement. We bumped fists. More snickering
from the crowd, now directed at I-r0k.
I-r0k glared at us a moment. “OK. Let’s see who the real poseur is,” he said.
“Check this out, girls.” Grinning, he produced an item from his inventory and
held it up. It was an old Atari 2600 game, still in the box. He purposefully
covered the game’s title with his hand, but I recognized the cover artwork
anyway. It was a painting of a young man and woman in ancient Greek attire,
both brandishing swords. Lurking behind them were a minotaur and a bearded
guy with an eye patch. “Know what this is, hotshot?” I-r0k said, challenging me.
“I’ll even give you a clue.… It’s an Atari game, released as part of a contest. It
contained several puzzles, and if you solved them, you could win a prize. Sound
familiar?”
I-r0k was always trying to impress us with some clue or piece of Halliday lore
he foolishly believed he’d been the first to uncover. Gunters loved to play the
game of one-upmanship and were constantly trying to prove they had acquired
more obscure knowledge than everyone else. But I-r0k totally sucked at it.

“You’re joking, right?” I said. “You just now discovered the Swordquest
series?”
I-r0k deflated.
“You’re holding Swordquest: Earthworld,” I continued. “The first game in the
Swordquest series. Released in 1982.” I smiled wide. “Can you name the next
three games in the series?”
His eyes narrowed. He was, of course, stumped. Like I said, he was a total
poseur.
“Anyone else?” I said, opening the question up to the floor. The gunters in the
crowd eyed each other, but no one spoke up.
“Fireworld, Waterworld, and Airworld,” Aech answered.
“Bingo!” I said, and we bumped fists again. “Although Airworld was never
actually finished, because Atari fell on hard times and canceled the contest
before it was completed.”
I-r0k quietly put the game box back in his inventory.
“You should join up with the Sux0rz, I-r0k,” Aech said, laughing. “They could
really use someone with your vast stores of knowledge.”
I-r0k flipped him the bird. “If you two fags already knew about the
Swordquest contest, how come I’ve never once heard you mention it?”
“Come on, I-r0k,” Aech said, shaking his head. “Swordquest: Earthworld was
Atari’s unofficial sequel to Adventure. Every gunter worth their salt knows about
that contest. How much more obvious can you get?”
I-r0k tried to save some face. “OK, if you’re both such experts, who
programmed all of the Swordquest games?”
“Dan Hitchens and Tod Frye,” I recited. “Try asking me something difficult.”
“I got one for you,” Aech interjected. “What were the prizes Atari gave out to
the winner of each contest?”
“Ah,” I said. “Good one. Let’s see.… The prize for the Earthworld contest
was the Talisman of Penultimate Truth. It was solid gold and encrusted with
diamonds. The kid who won it melted it down to pay for college, as I recall.”
“Yeah, yeah,” Aech prodded. “Quit stalling. What about the other two?”
“I’m not stalling. The Fireworld prize was the Chalice of Light, and the
Waterworld prize was supposed to be the Crown of Life, but it was never
awarded, due to the cancellation of the contest. Same goes for the Airworld
prize, which was supposed to be a Philosopher’s Stone.”
Aech grinned and gave me a double high five, then added, “And if the contest
hadn’t been canceled, the winners of the first four rounds would have competed
for the grand prize, the Sword of Ultimate Sorcery.”
I nodded. “The prizes were all mentioned in the Swordquest comic books that

came with the games. Comic books which happen to be visible in the treasure
room in the final scene of Anorak’s Invitation, by the way.”
The crowd burst into applause. I-r0k lowered his head in shame.
Since I’d become a gunter, it had been obvious to me that Halliday had drawn
inspiration for his contest from the Swordquest contest. I had no idea if he’d
borrowed any of the puzzles from them too, but I’d studied the games and their
solutions thoroughly, just to be safe.
“Fine. You win,” I-r0k said. “But you both obviously need to get a life.”
“And you,” I said, “obviously need to find a new hobby. Because you clearly
lack the intelligence and commitment to be a gunter.”
“No doubt,” Aech said. “Try doing some research for a change, I-r0k. I mean,
did you ever hear of Wikipedia? It’s free, douchebag.”
I-r0k turned and walked over to the long boxes of comic books stacked on the
other side of the room, as if he’d lost interest in the discussion. “Whatever,” he
said over his shoulder. “If I didn’t spend so much time offline, getting laid, I’d
probably know just as much worthless shit as you two do.”
Aech ignored him and turned back to me. “What were the names of the twins
who appeared in the Swordquest comic books?”
“Tarra and Torr.”
“Damn, Z! You are the man.”
“Thanks, Aech.”
A message flashed on my display, informing me that the three-minute-warning
bell had just rung in my classroom. I knew Aech and I-r0k were seeing the same
warning, because our schools operated on the same schedule.
“Time for another day of higher learning,” Aech said, standing up.
“Drag,” I-r0k said. “See you losers later.” He gave me the finger; then his
avatar disappeared as he logged out of the chat room. The other gunters began to
log out and vanish too, until only Aech and I remained.
“Seriously, Aech,” I said. “Why do you let that moron hang out here?”
“Because he’s fun to beat at videogames. And his ignorance gives me hope.”
“How so?”
“Because if most of the other gunters out there are as clueless as I-r0k—and
they are, Z, believe me—that means you and I really do have a shot at winning
the contest.”
I shrugged. “I guess that’s one way to look at it.”
“Wanna hang after school again tonight? Around seven or so? I’ve got a few
errands to run, but then I’m gonna tackle some of the stuff on my need-to-watch
list. A Spaced marathon, perhaps?”
“Oh, hell yes,” I said. “Count me in.”

We logged out simultaneously, just as the final bell began to ring.

My avatar’s eyes slid open, and I was back in my World History classroom.
The seats around me were now filled with other students, and our teacher, Mr.
Avenovich, was materializing at the front of the classroom. Mr. A’s avatar looked
like a portly, bearded college professor. He sported an infectious grin, wirerimmed spectacles, and a tweed jacket with patches on the elbows. When he
spoke, he somehow always managed to sound like he was reading a passage
from Dickens. I liked him. He was a good teacher.
Of course, we didn’t know who Mr. Avenovich really was or where he lived.
We didn’t know his real name, or even if “he” was really a man. For all we
knew, he could have been a small Inuit woman living in Anchorage, Alaska, who
had adopted this appearance and voice to make her students more receptive to
her lessons. But for some reason, I suspected that Mr. Avenovich’s avatar looked
and sounded just like the person operating it.
All of my teachers were pretty great. Unlike their real-world counterparts,
most of the OASIS public school teachers seemed to genuinely enjoy their job,
probably because they didn’t have to spend half their time acting as babysitters
and disciplinarians. The OASIS software took care of that, ensuring that students
remained quiet and in their seats. All the teachers had to do was teach.
It was also a lot easier for online teachers to hold their students’ attention,
because here in the OASIS, the classrooms were like holodecks. Teachers could
take their students on a virtual field trip every day, without ever leaving the
school grounds.
During our World History lesson that morning, Mr. Avenovich loaded up a
stand-alone simulation so that our class could witness the discovery of King
Tut’s tomb by archaeologists in Egypt in AD 1922. (The day before, we’d visited
the same spot in 1334 BC and had seen Tutankhamen’s empire in all its glory.)
In my next class, Biology, we traveled through a human heart and watched it
pumping from the inside, just like in that old movie Fantastic Voyage.
In Art class we toured the Louvre while all of our avatars wore silly berets.

In my Astronomy class we visited each of Jupiter’s moons. We stood on the
volcanic surface of Io while our teacher explained how the moon had originally
formed. As our teacher spoke to us, Jupiter loomed behind her, filling half the
sky, its Great Red Spot churning slowly just over her left shoulder. Then she
snapped her fingers and we were standing on Europa, discussing the possibility
of extraterrestrial life beneath the moon’s icy crust.
I spent my lunch period sitting in one of the green fields bordering the school,
staring at the simulated scenery while I munched on a protein bar with my visor
on. It beat staring at the inside of my hideout. I was a senior, so I was allowed to
go off-world during lunch if I wanted to, but I didn’t have that kind of spare
dough to blow.
Logging into the OASIS was free, but traveling around inside it wasn’t. Most
of the time, I didn’t have enough credits to teleport off-world and get back to
Ludus. When the last bell rang each day, the students who had things to do in the
real world would log out of the OASIS and vanish. Everyone else would head
off-world. A lot of kids owned their own interplanetary vehicles. School parking
lots all over Ludus were filled with UFOs, TIE fighters, old NASA space
shuttles, Vipers from Battlestar Galactica, and other spacecraft designs lifted
from every sci-fi movie and TV show you can think of. Every afternoon I would
stand on the school’s front lawn and watch with envy as these ships filled the
sky, zooming off to explore the simulation’s endless possibilities. The kids who
didn’t own ships would either hitch a ride with a friend or stampede to the
nearest transport terminal, headed for some offworld dance club, gaming arena,
or rock concert. But not me. I wasn’t going anywhere. I was stranded on Ludus,
the most boring planet in the entire OASIS.
The Ontologically Anthropocentric Sensory Immersive Simulation was a big
place.
When the OASIS had first been launched, it contained only a few hundred
planets for users to explore, all created by GSS programmers and artists. Their
environments ran the gamut, from sword-and-sorcery settings to cyberpunkthemed planetwide cities to irradiated postapocalyptic zombie-infested
wastelands. Some planets were designed with painstaking detail. Others were
randomly generated from a series of templates. Each one was populated with a
variety of artificially intelligent NPCs (nonplayer characters)—computercontrolled humans, animals, monsters, aliens, and androids with which OASIS
users could interact.
GSS had also licensed preexisting virtual worlds from their competitors, so
content that had already been created for games like Everquest and World of
Warcraft was ported over to the OASIS, and copies of Norrath and Azeroth were

added to the growing catalog of OASIS planets. Other virtual worlds soon
followed suit, from the Metaverse to the Matrix. The Firefly universe was
anchored in a sector adjacent to the Star Wars galaxy, with a detailed re-creation
of the Star Trek universe in the sector adjacent to that. Users could now teleport
back and forth between their favorite fictional worlds. Middle Earth. Vulcan.
Pern. Arrakis. Magrathea. Discworld, Mid-World, Riverworld, Ringworld.
Worlds upon worlds.
For the sake of zoning and navigation, the OASIS had been divided equally
into twenty-seven cube-shaped “sectors,” each containing hundreds of different
planets. (The three-dimensional map of all twenty-seven sectors distinctly
resembled an ’80s puzzle toy called a Rubik’s Cube. Like most gunters, I knew
this was no coincidence.) Each sector measured exactly ten light-hours across, or
about 10.8 billion kilometers. So if you were traveling at the speed of light (the
fastest speed attainable by any spacecraft inside the OASIS), you could get from
one side of a sector to the other in exactly ten hours. That sort of long-distance
travel wasn’t cheap. Spacecraft that could travel at light speed were rare, and
they required fuel to operate. Charging people for virtual fuel to power their
virtual spaceships was one of the ways Gregarious Simulation Systems
generated revenue, since accessing the OASIS was free. But GSS’s primary
source of income came from teleportation fares. Teleportation was the fastest
way to travel, but it was also the most expensive.
Traveling around inside the OASIS wasn’t just costly—it was also dangerous.
Each sector was divided up into many different zones that varied in size and
shape. Some zones were so large that they encompassed several planets, while
others covered only a few kilometers on the surface of a single world. Each zone
had a unique combination of rules and parameters. Magic would function in
some zones and not in others. The same was true of technology. If you flew your
technology-based starship into a zone where technology didn’t function, your
engines would fail the moment you crossed the zone border. Then you’d have to
hire some silly gray-bearded sorcerer with a spell-powered space barge to tow
your ass back into a technology zone.
Dual zones permitted the use of both magic and technology, and null zones
didn’t allow either. There were pacifist zones where no player-versus-player
combat was allowed, and player-versus-player zones where it was every avatar
for themselves.
You had to be careful whenever you entered a new zone or sector. You had to
be prepared.
But like I said, I didn’t have that problem. I was stuck at school.
Ludus had been designed as a place of learning, so the planet had been created

without a single quest portal or gaming zone anywhere on its surface. The only
thing to be found here were thousands of identical school campuses separated by
rolling green fields, perfectly landscaped parks, rivers, meadows, and sprawling
template-generated forests. There were no castles, dungeons, or orbiting space
fortresses for my avatar to raid. And there were no NPC villains, monsters, or
aliens for me to fight, so there was no treasure or magic items for me to plunder.
This totally sucked, for a lot of reasons.
Completing quests, fighting NPCs, and gathering treasure were the only ways
a low-level avatar like mine could earn experience points (XPs). Earning XPs
was how you increased your avatar’s power level, strength, and abilities.
A lot of OASIS users didn’t care about their avatar’s power level or bother
with the gaming aspects of the simulation at all. They only used the OASIS for
entertainment, business, shopping, and hanging out with their friends. These
users simply avoided entering any gaming or PvP zones where their defenseless
first-level avatars could be attacked by NPCs or by other players. If you stayed
in safe zones, like Ludus, you didn’t have to worry about your avatar getting
robbed, kidnapped, or killed.
I hated being stuck in a safe zone.
If I was going to find Halliday’s egg, I knew I would eventually have to
venture out in the dangerous sectors of the OASIS. And if I wasn’t powerful or
well-armed enough to defend myself, I wasn’t going to stay alive for very long.
Over the past five years, I’d managed to slowly, gradually raise my avatar up
to third level. This hadn’t been easy. I’d done it by hitching rides off-world with
other students (mostly Aech) who happened to be headed to a planet where my
wuss avatar could survive. I’d have them drop me near a newbie-level gaming
zone and spend the rest of the night or weekend slaying orcs, kobolds, or some
other piddly class of monster that was too weak to kill me. For each NPC my
avatar defeated, I would earn a few meager experience points and, usually, a
handful of copper or silver coins dropped by my slain foes. These coins were
instantly converted to credits, which I used to pay the teleportation fare back to
Ludus, often just before the final school bell rang. Sometimes, but not often, one
of the NPCs I killed would drop an item. That was how I’d obtained my avatar’s
sword, shield, and armor.
I’d stopped hitching rides with Aech at the end of the previous school year.
His avatar was now above thirtieth level, and so he was almost always headed to
a planet where it wasn’t safe for my avatar. He was happy to drop me on some
noob world along the way, but if I didn’t earn enough credits to pay for my fare
back to Ludus, I’d wind up missing school because I was stuck on some other
planet. This was not an acceptable excuse. I’d now racked up so many

unexcused absences that I was in danger of being expelled. If that happened, I
would have to return my school-issued OASIS console and visor. Worse, I’d be
transferred back to school in the real world to finish out my senior year there. I
couldn’t risk that.
So these days I rarely left Ludus at all. I was stuck here, and stuck at third
level. Having a third-level avatar was a colossal embarrassment. None of the
other gunters took you seriously unless you were at least tenth level. Even
though I’d been a gunter since day one, everyone still considered me a noob. It
was beyond frustrating.
In desperation, I’d tried to find a part-time after-school job, just to earn some
walking-around money. I applied for dozens of tech support and programming
jobs (mostly grunt construction work, coding parts of OASIS malls and office
buildings), but it was completely hopeless. Millions of college-educated adults
couldn’t get one of those jobs. The Great Recession was now entering its third
decade, and unemployment was still at a record high. Even the fast-food joints in
my neighborhood had a two-year waiting list for job applicants.
So I remained stuck at school. I felt like a kid standing in the world’s greatest
video arcade without any quarters, unable to do anything but walk around and
watch the other kids play.

After lunch, I headed to my favorite class, Advanced OASIS Studies. This
was a senior-year elective where you learned about the history of the OASIS and
its creators. Talk about an easy A.
For the past five years, I’d devoted all of my free time to learning as much as I
possibly could about James Halliday. I’d exhaustively studied his life,
accomplishments, and interests. Over a dozen different Halliday biographies had
been published in the years since his death, and I’d read them all. Several
documentary films had also been made about him, and I’d studied those, too. I’d
studied every word Halliday had ever written, and I’d played every videogame
he’d ever made. I took notes, writing down every detail I thought might be
related to the Hunt. I kept everything in a notebook (which I’d started to call my
“grail diary” after watching the third Indiana Jones film).
The more I’d learned about Halliday’s life, the more I’d grown to idolize him.
He was a god among geeks, a nerd über-deity on the level of Gygax, Garriott,
and Gates. He’d left home after high school with nothing but his wits and his
imagination, and he’d used them to attain worldwide fame and amass a vast
fortune. He’d created an entirely new reality that now provided an escape for
most of humanity. And to top it all off, he’d turned his last will and testament
into the greatest videogame contest of all time.
I spent most of my time in Advanced OASIS Studies class annoying our
teacher, Mr. Ciders, by pointing out errors in our textbook and raising my hand
to interject some relevant bit of Halliday trivia that I (and I alone) thought was
interesting. After the first few weeks of class, Mr. Ciders had stopped calling on
me unless no one else knew the answer to his question.
Today, he was reading excerpts from The Egg Man, a bestselling Halliday
biography that I’d already read four times. During his lecture, I kept having to
resist the urge to interrupt him and point out all of the really important details the
book left out. Instead, I just made a mental note of each omission, and as Mr.
Ciders began to recount the circumstances of Halliday’s childhood, I once again

tried to glean whatever secrets I could from the strange way Halliday had lived
his life, and from the odd clues about himself he’d chosen to leave behind.

James Donovan Halliday was born on June 12, 1972, in Middletown, Ohio. He
was an only child. His father was an alcoholic machine operator and his mother
was a bipolar waitress.
By all accounts, James was a bright boy, but socially inept. He had an
extremely difficult time communicating with the people around him. Despite his
obvious intelligence, he did poorly in school, because most of his attention was
focused on computers, comic books, sci-fi and fantasy novels, movies, and
above all else, videogames.
One day in junior high, Halliday was sitting alone in the cafeteria reading a
Dungeons & Dragons Player’s Handbook. The game fascinated him, but he’d
never actually played it, because he’d never had any friends to play it with. A
boy in his class named Ogden Morrow noticed what Halliday was reading and
invited him to attend one of the weekly D&D gaming sessions held at his house.
There, in Morrow’s basement, Halliday was introduced to an entire group of
“mega geeks” just like himself. They immediately accepted him as one of their
own, and for the first time in his life, James Halliday had a circle of friends.
Ogden Morrow eventually became Halliday’s business partner, collaborator,
and best friend. Many would later liken the pairing of Morrow and Halliday to
that of Jobs and Wozniak or Lennon and McCartney. It was a partnership
destined to alter the course of human history.
At age fifteen, Halliday created his first videogame, Anorak’s Quest. He
programmed it in BASIC on a TRS-80 Color Computer he’d received the
previous Christmas (though he’d asked his parents for the slightly more
expensive Commodore 64). Anorak’s Quest was an adventure game set in
Chthonia, the fantasy world Halliday had created for his high-school Dungeons
& Dragons campaign. “Anorak” was a nickname Halliday had been given by a
female British exchange student at his high school. He liked the name Anorak so
much that he’d used it for his favorite D&D character, the powerful wizard who
later appeared in many of his videogames.
Halliday created Anorak’s Quest for fun, to share with the guys in his D&D
gaming group. They all found the game addictive, and lost countless hours
attempting to solve its intricate riddles and puzzles. Ogden Morrow convinced
Halliday that Anorak’s Quest was better than most of the computer games
currently on the market, and encouraged him to try selling it. He helped Halliday
create some simple cover artwork for the game, and together, the two of them

hand-copied Anorak’s Quest onto dozens of 5¼-inch floppy disks and stuck
them into Ziploc bags along with a single photocopied sheet of instructions.
They began selling the game on the software rack at their local computer store.
Before long, they couldn’t make copies fast enough to meet the demand.
Morrow and Halliday decided to start their own videogame company,
Gregarious Games, which initially operated out of Morrow’s basement. Halliday
programmed new versions of Anorak’s Quest for the Atari 800XL, Apple II, and
Commodore 64 computers, and Morrow began placing ads for the game in the
back of several computer magazines. Within six months, Anorak’s Quest became
a national bestseller.
Halliday and Morrow almost didn’t graduate from high school because they
spent most of their senior year working on Anorak’s Quest II. And instead of
going off to college, they both focused all of their energy on their new company,
which had now grown too large for Morrow’s basement. In 1990, Gregarious
Games moved into its first real office, located in a run-down strip mall in
Columbus, Ohio.
Over the next decade, the small company took the videogame industry by
storm, releasing a series of bestselling action and adventure games, all using a
groundbreaking first-person graphics engine created by Halliday. Gregarious
Games set a new standard for immersive gaming, and every time they released a
new title, it pushed the envelope of what seemed possible on the computer
hardware available at the time.
The rotund Ogden Morrow was naturally charismatic, and he handled all of
the company’s business affairs and public relations. At every Gregarious Games
press conference, Morrow grinned infectiously from behind his unruly beard and
wire-rimmed spectacles, using his natural gift for hype and hyperbole. Halliday
seemed to be Morrow’s polar opposite in every way. He was tall, gaunt, and
painfully shy, and he preferred to stay out of the limelight.
People employed by Gregarious Games during this period say that Halliday
frequently locked himself in his office, where he programmed incessantly, often
going without food, sleep, or human contact for days or even weeks.
On the few occasions that Halliday agreed to do interviews, his behavior came
off as bizarre, even by game-designer standards. He was hyperkinetic, aloof, and
so socially inept that the interviewers often came away with the impression he
was mentally ill. Halliday tended to speak so rapidly that his words were often
unintelligible, and he had a disturbing high-pitched laugh, made even more so
because he was usually the only one who knew what he was laughing about.
When Halliday got bored during an interview (or conversation), he would
usually get up and walk out without saying a word.

Halliday had many well-known obsessions. Chief among them were classic
videogames, sci-fi and fantasy novels, and movies of all genres. He also had an
extreme fixation on the 1980s, the decade during which he’d been a teenager.
Halliday seemed to expect everyone around him to share his obsessions, and he
often lashed out at those who didn’t. He was known to fire longtime employees
for not recognizing an obscure line of movie dialogue he quoted, or if he
discovered they weren’t familiar with one of his favorite cartoons, comic books,
or videogames. (Ogden Morrow would always hire the employee back, usually
without Halliday ever noticing.)
As the years went on, Halliday’s already-stunted social skills seemed to
deteriorate even further. (Several exhaustive psychological studies were done on
Halliday following his death, and his obsessive adherence to routine and
preoccupation with a few obscure areas of interest led many psychologists to
conclude that Halliday had suffered from Asperger’s syndrome, or from some
other form of high-functioning autism.)
Despite his eccentricities, no one ever questioned Halliday’s genius. The
games he created were addictive and wildly popular. By the end of the twentieth
century, Halliday was widely recognized as the greatest videogame designer of
his generation—and, some would argue, of all time.
Ogden Morrow was a brilliant programmer in his own right, but his true talent
was his knack for business. In addition to collaborating on the company’s games,
he masterminded all of their early marketing campaigns and shareware
distribution schemes, with astounding results. When Gregarious Games finally
went public, their stock immediately shot into the stratosphere.
By their thirtieth birthdays, Halliday and Morrow were both multimillionaires.
They purchased mansions on the same street. Morrow bought a Lamborghini,
took several long vacations, and traveled the world. Halliday bought and
restored one of the original DeLoreans used in the Back to the Future films,
continued to spend nearly all of his time welded to a computer keyboard, and
used his newfound wealth to amass what would eventually become the world’s
largest private collection of classic videogames, Star Wars action figures, vintage
lunch boxes, and comic books.
At the height of its success, Gregarious Games appeared to fall dormant.
Several years elapsed during which they released no new games. Morrow made
cryptic announcements, saying the company was working on an ambitious
project that would move them in an entirely new direction. Rumors began to
circulate that Gregarious Games was developing some sort of new computer
gaming hardware and that this secret project was rapidly exhausting the
company’s considerable financial resources. There were also indications that

both Halliday and Morrow had invested most of their own personal fortunes in
the company’s new endeavor. Word began to spread that Gregarious Games was
in danger of going bankrupt.
Then, in December 2012, Gregarious Games rebranded itself as Gregarious
Simulation Systems, and under this new banner they launched their flagship
product, the only product GSS would ever release: the OASIS—the
Ontologically Anthropocentric Sensory Immersive Simulation.
The OASIS would ultimately change the way people around the world lived,
worked, and communicated. It would transform entertainment, social
networking, and even global politics. Even though it was initially marketed as a
new kind of massively multiplayer online game, the OASIS quickly evolved into
a new way of life.

In the days before the OASIS, massively multiplayer online games (MMOs)
were among the first shared synthetic environments. They allowed thousands of
players to simultaneously coexist inside a simulated world, which they
connected to via the Internet. The overall size of these environments was
relatively small, usually just a single world, or a dozen or so small planets.
MMO players could only see these online environments through a small twodimensional window—their desktop computer monitor—and they could only
interact with it by using keyboards, mice, and other crude input devices.
Gregarious Simulation Systems elevated the MMO concept to an entirely new
level. The OASIS didn’t limit its users to just one planet, or even a dozen. The
OASIS contained hundreds (and eventually thousands) of high-resolution 3-D
worlds for people to explore, and each one was beautifully rendered in
meticulous graphical detail, right down to bugs and blades of grass, wind and
weather patterns. Users could circumnavigate each of these planets and never see
the same terrain twice. Even in its first primitive incarnation, the scope of the
simulation was staggering.
Halliday and Morrow referred to the OASIS as an “open-source reality,” a
malleable online universe that anyone could access via the Internet, using their
existing home computer or videogame console. You could log in and instantly
escape the drudgery of your day-to-day life. You could create an entirely new
persona for yourself, with complete control over how you looked and sounded to
others. In the OASIS, the fat could become thin, the ugly could become
beautiful, and the shy, extroverted. Or vice versa. You could change your name,
age, sex, race, height, weight, voice, hair color, and bone structure. Or you could
cease being human altogether, and become an elf, ogre, alien, or any other

creature from literature, movies, or mythology.
In the OASIS, you could become whomever and whatever you wanted to be,
without ever revealing your true identity, because your anonymity was
guaranteed.
Users could also alter the content of the virtual worlds inside the OASIS, or
create entirely new ones. A person’s online presence was no longer limited to a
website or a social-networking profile. In the OASIS, you could create your own
private planet, build a virtual mansion on it, furnish and decorate it however you
liked, and invite a few thousand friends over for a party. And those friends could
be in a dozen different time zones, spread all over the globe.
The keys to the success of the OASIS were the two new pieces of interface
hardware that GSS had created, both of which were required to access the
simulation: the OASIS visor and haptic gloves.
The wireless one-size-fits-all OASIS visor was slightly larger than a pair of
sunglasses. It used harmless low-powered lasers to draw the stunningly real
environment of the OASIS right onto its wearer’s retinas, completely immersing
their entire field of vision in the online world. The visor was light-years ahead of
the clunky virtual-reality goggles available prior to that time, and it represented a
paradigm shift in virtual-reality technology—as did the lightweight OASIS
haptic gloves, which allowed users to directly control the hands of their avatar
and to interact with their simulated environment as if they were actually inside it.
When you picked up objects, opened doors, or operated vehicles, the haptic
gloves made you feel these nonexistent objects and surfaces as if they were
really right there in front of you. The gloves let you, as the television ads put it,
“reach in and touch the OASIS.” Working together, the visor and the gloves
made entering the OASIS an experience unlike anything else available, and once
people got a taste of it, there was no going back.
The software that powered the simulation, Halliday’s new OASIS Reality
Engine, also represented a huge technological breakthrough. It managed to
overcome limitations that had plagued previous simulated realities. In addition to
restricting the overall size of their virtual environments, earlier MMOs had been
forced to limit their virtual populations, usually to a few thousand users per
server. If too many people were logged in at the same time, the simulation would
slow to a crawl and avatars would freeze in midstride as the system struggled to
keep up. But the OASIS utilized a new kind of fault-tolerant server array that
could draw additional processing power from every computer connected to it. At
the time of its initial launch, the OASIS could handle up to five million
simultaneous users, with no discernible latency and no chance of a system crash.
A massive marketing campaign promoted the launch of the OASIS. The

pervasive television, billboard, and Internet ads featured a lush green oasis,
complete with palm trees and a pool of crystal blue water, surrounded on all
sides by a vast barren desert.
GSS’s new endeavor was a massive success from day one. The OASIS was
what people had been dreaming of for decades. The “virtual reality” they had
been promised for so long was finally here, and it was even better than they’d
imagined. The OASIS was an online utopia, a holodeck for the home. And its
biggest selling point? It was free.
Most online games of the day generated revenue by charging users a monthly
subscription fee for access. GSS only charged a onetime sign-up fee of twentyfive cents, for which you received a lifetime OASIS account. The ads all used the
same tagline: The OASIS—it’s the greatest videogame ever created, and it only
costs a quarter.
At a time of drastic social and cultural upheaval, when most of the world’s
population longed for an escape from reality, the OASIS provided it, in a form
that was cheap, legal, safe, and not (medically proven to be) addictive. The
ongoing energy crisis contributed greatly to the OASIS’s runaway popularity.
The skyrocketing cost of oil made airline and automobile travel too expensive
for the average citizen, and the OASIS became the only getaway most people
could afford. As the era of cheap, abundant energy drew to a close, poverty and
unrest began to spread like a virus. Every day, more and more people had reason
to seek solace inside Halliday and Morrow’s virtual utopia.
Any business that wanted to set up shop inside the OASIS had to rent or
purchase virtual real estate (which Morrow dubbed “surreal estate”) from GSS.
Anticipating this, the company had set aside Sector One as the simulation’s
designated business zone and began to sell and rent millions of blocks of surreal
estate there. City-sized shopping malls were erected in the blink of an eye, and
storefronts spread across planets like time-lapse footage of mold devouring an
orange. Urban development had never been so easy.
In addition to the billions of dollars that GSS raked in selling land that didn’t
actually exist, they made a killing selling virtual objects and vehicles. The
OASIS became such an integral part of people’s day-to-day social lives that
users were more than willing to shell out real money to buy accessories for their
avatars: clothing, furniture, houses, flying cars, magic swords and machine guns.
These items were nothing but ones and zeros stored on the OASIS servers, but
they were also status symbols. Most items only cost a few credits, but since they
cost nothing for GSS to manufacture, it was all profit. Even in the throes of an
ongoing economic recession, the OASIS allowed Americans to continue
engaging in their favorite pastime: shopping.

The OASIS quickly became the single most popular use for the Internet, so
much so that the terms “OASIS” and “Internet” gradually became synonymous.
And the incredibly easy-to-use three-dimensional OASIS OS, which GSS gave
away for free, became the single most popular computer operating system in the
world.
Before long, billions of people around the world were working and playing in
the OASIS every day. Some of them met, fell in love, and got married without
ever setting foot on the same continent. The lines of distinction between a
person’s real identity and that of their avatar began to blur.
It was the dawn of new era, one where most of the human race now spent all
of their free time inside a videogame.

The rest of my school day passed quickly until my final class, Latin.
Most students took a foreign language they might actually be able to use
someday, like Mandarin, or Hindi, or Spanish. I’d decided to take Latin because
James Halliday had taken Latin. He’d also occasionally used Latin words and
phrases in his early adventure games. Unfortunately, even with the limitless
possibilities of the OASIS at her disposal, my Latin teacher, Ms. Rank, still had a
hard time making her lessons interesting. And today she was reviewing a bunch
of verbs I’d already memorized, so I found my attention drifting almost
immediately.
While a class was in session, the simulation prevented students from accessing
any data or programs that weren’t authorized by their teacher, to prevent kids
from watching movies, playing games, or chatting with each other instead of
paying attention to the lesson. Luckily, during my junior year, I’d discovered a
bug in the school’s online library software, and by exploiting it, I could access
any book in the school’s online library, including Anorak’s Almanac. So
whenever I got bored (like right now) I would pull it up in a window on my
display and read over my favorite passages to pass the time.
Over the past five years, the Almanac had become my bible. Like most books
nowadays, it was only available in electronic format. But I’d wanted to be able
to read the Almanac night or day, even during one of the stacks’ frequent power
outages, so I’d fixed up an old discarded laser printer and used it to print out a
hard copy. I put it in an old three-ring binder that I kept in my backpack and
studied until I knew every word by heart.
The Almanac contained thousands of references to Halliday’s favorite books,
TV shows, movies, songs, graphic novels, and videogames. Most of these items
were over forty years old, and so free digital copies of them could be
downloaded from the OASIS. If there was something I needed that wasn’t
legally available for free, I could almost always get it by using Guntorrent, a filesharing program used by gunters around the world.

When it came to my research, I never took any shortcuts. Over the past five
years, I’d worked my way down the entire recommended gunter reading list.
Douglas Adams. Kurt Vonnegut. Neal Stephenson. Richard K. Morgan. Stephen
King. Orson Scott Card. Terry Pratchett. Terry Brooks. Bester, Bradbury,
Haldeman, Heinlein, Tolkien, Vance, Gibson, Gaiman, Sterling, Moorcock,
Scalzi, Zelazny. I read every novel by every single one of Halliday’s favorite
authors.
And I didn’t stop there.
I also watched every single film he referenced in the Almanac. If it was one of
Halliday’s favorites, like WarGames, Ghostbusters, Real Genius, Better Off
Dead, or Revenge of the Nerds, I rewatched it until I knew every scene by heart.
I devoured each of what Halliday referred to as “The Holy Trilogies”: Star
Wars (original and prequel trilogies, in that order), Lord of the Rings, The
Matrix, Mad Max, Back to the Future, and Indiana Jones. (Halliday once said
that he preferred to pretend the other Indiana Jones films, from Kingdom of the
Crystal Skull onward, didn’t exist. I tended to agree.)
I also absorbed the complete filmographies of each of his favorite directors.
Cameron, Gilliam, Jackson, Fincher, Kubrick, Lucas, Spielberg, Del Toro,
Tarantino. And, of course, Kevin Smith.
I spent three months studying every John Hughes teen movie and memorizing
all the key lines of dialogue.
Only the meek get pinched. The bold survive.
You could say I covered all the bases.
I studied Monty Python. And not just Holy Grail, either. Every single one of
their films, albums, and books, and every episode of the original BBC series.
(Including those two “lost” episodes they did for German television.)
I wasn’t going to cut any corners.
I wasn’t going to miss something obvious.
Somewhere along the way, I started to go overboard.
I may, in fact, have started to go a little insane.
I watched every episode of The Greatest American Hero, Airwolf, The ATeam, Knight Rider, Misfits of Science, and The Muppet Show.
What about The Simpsons, you ask?
I knew more about Springfield than I knew about my own city.
Star Trek? Oh, I did my homework. TOS, TNG, DS9. Even Voyager and
Enterprise. I watched them all in chronological order. The movies, too. Phasers
locked on target.
I gave myself a crash course in ’80s Saturday-morning cartoons.
I learned the name of every last goddamn Gobot and Transformer.

Land of the Lost, Thundarr the Barbarian, He-Man, Schoolhouse Rock!, G.I.
Joe—I knew them all. Because knowing is half the battle.
Who was my friend, when things got rough? H.R. Pufnstuf.
Japan? Did I cover Japan?
Yes. Yes indeed. Anime and live-action. Godzilla, Gamera, Star Blazers, The
Space Giants, and G-Force. Go, Speed Racer, Go.
I wasn’t some dilettante.
I wasn’t screwing around.
I memorized every last Bill Hicks stand-up routine.
Music? Well, covering all the music wasn’t easy.
It took some time.
The ’80s was a long decade (ten whole years), and Halliday didn’t seem to
have had very discerning taste. He listened to everything. So I did too. Pop, rock,
new wave, punk, heavy metal. From the Police to Journey to R.E.M. to the
Clash. I tackled it all.
I burned through the entire They Might Be Giants discography in under two
weeks. Devo took a little longer.
I watched a lot of YouTube videos of cute geeky girls playing ’80s cover tunes
on ukuleles. Technically, this wasn’t part of my research, but I had a serious
cute-geeky-girls-playing-ukuleles fetish that I can neither explain nor defend.
I memorized lyrics. Silly lyrics, by bands with names like Van Halen, Bon
Jovi, Def Leppard, and Pink Floyd.
I kept at it.
I burned the midnight oil.
Did you know that Midnight Oil was an Australian band, with a 1987 hit titled
“Beds Are Burning”?
I was obsessed. I wouldn’t quit. My grades suffered. I didn’t care.
I read every issue of every comic book title Halliday had ever collected.
I wasn’t going to have anyone questioning my commitment.
Especially when it came to the videogames.
Videogames were my area of expertise.
My double-weapon specialization.
My dream Jeopardy! category.
I downloaded every game mentioned or referenced in the Almanac, from
Akalabeth to Zaxxon. I played each title until I had mastered it, then moved on
to the next one.
You’d be amazed how much research you can get done when you have no life
whatsoever. Twelve hours a day, seven days a week, is a lot of study time.
I worked my way through every videogame genre and platform. Classic

arcade coin-ops, home computer, console, and handheld. Text-based adventures,
first-person shooters, third-person RPGs. Ancient 8-, 16-, and 32-bit classics
written in the previous century. The harder a game was to beat, the more I
enjoyed it. And as I played these ancient digital relics, night after night, year
after year, I discovered I had a talent for them. I could master most action titles
in a few hours, and there wasn’t an adventure or role-playing game I couldn’t
solve. I never needed any walkthroughs or cheat codes. Everything just clicked.
And I was even better at the old arcade games. When I was in the zone on a
high-speed classic like Defender, I felt like a hawk in flight, or the way I thought
a shark must feel as it cruises the ocean floor. For the first time, I knew what it
was to be a natural at something. To have a gift.
But it wasn’t my research into old movies, comics, or videogames that had
yielded my first real clue. That had come while I was studying the history of old
pen-and-paper role-playing games.

Reprinted on the first page of Anorak’s Almanac were the four rhyming lines of
verse Halliday had recited in the Invitation video.
Three hidden keys open three secret gates
Wherein the errant will be tested for worthy traits
And those with the skill to survive these straits
Will reach The End where the prize awaits
At first, this seemed to be the only direct reference to the contest in the entire
almanac. But then, buried among all those rambling journal entries and essays on
pop culture, I discovered a hidden message.
Scattered throughout the text of the Almanac were a series of marked letters.
Each of these letters had a tiny, nearly invisible “notch” cut into its outline. I’d
first noticed these notches the year after Halliday died. I was reading my hard
copy of the Almanac at the time, and so at first I thought the notches were
nothing but tiny printing imperfections, perhaps due to the paper or the ancient
printer I’d used to print out the Almanac. But when I checked the electronic
version of the book available on Halliday’s website, I found the same notches on
the exact same letters. And if you zoomed in on one of those letters, the notches
stood out as plain as day.
Halliday had put them there. He’d marked these letters for a reason.
There turned out to be one hundred and twelve of these notched letters
scattered throughout the book. By writing them down in the order they appeared,

I discovered that they spelled something. I nearly died of excitement as I wrote it
down in my grail diary:
The Copper Key awaits explorers
In a tomb filled with horrors
But you have much to learn
If you hope to earn
A place among the high scorers
Other gunters had also discovered this hidden message, of course, but they
were all wise enough to keep it to themselves. For a while, anyway. About six
months after I discovered the hidden message, this loudmouth MIT freshman
found it too. His name was Steven Pendergast, and he decided to get his fifteen
minutes of fame by sharing his “discovery” with the media. The newsfeeds
broadcast interviews with this moron for a month, even though he didn’t have
the first clue about the message’s meaning. After that, going public with a clue
became known as “pulling a Pendergast.”
Once the message became public knowledge, gunters nicknamed it “the
Limerick.” The entire world had known about it for almost four years now, but
no one seemed to understand its true meaning, and the Copper Key still had yet
to be found.
I knew Halliday had frequently used similar riddles in many of his early
adventure games, and each of those riddles had made sense in the context of its
game. So I devoted an entire section of my grail diary to deciphering the
Limerick, line by line.
The Copper Key awaits explorers
This line seemed pretty straightforward. No hidden meaning that I could
detect.
In a tomb filled with horrors.
This line was trickier. Taken at face value, it seemed to say that the key was
hidden in a tomb somewhere, one filled with horrifying stuff. But then, during
the course of my research, I discovered an old Dungeons & Dragons supplement
called Tomb of Horrors, which had been published in 1978. From the moment I
saw the title, I was certain the second line of the Limerick was a reference to it.
Halliday and Morrow had played Advanced Dungeons & Dragons all through
high school, along with several other pen-and-paper role-playing games, like
GURPS, Champions, Car Wars, and Rolemaster.
Tomb of Horrors was a thin booklet called a “module.” It contained detailed
maps and room-by-room descriptions of an underground labyrinth infested with

undead monsters. D&D players could explore the labyrinth with their characters
as the dungeon master read from the module and guided them through the story
it contained, describing everything they saw and encountered along the way.
As I learned more about how these early role-playing games worked, I
realized that a D&D module was the primitive equivalent of a quest in the
OASIS. And D&D characters were just like avatars. In a way, these old roleplaying games had been the first virtual-reality simulations, created long before
computers were powerful enough to do the job. In those days, if you wanted to
escape to another world, you had to create it yourself, using your brain, some
paper, pencils, dice, and a few rule books. This realization kind of blew my
mind. It changed my whole perspective on the Hunt for Halliday’s Easter egg.
From then on, I began to think of the Hunt as an elaborate D&D module. And
Halliday was obviously the dungeon master, even if he was now controlling the
game from beyond the grave.
I found a digital copy of the sixty-seven-year-old Tomb of Horrors module
buried deep in an ancient FTP archive. As I studied it, I began to develop a
theory: Somewhere in the OASIS, Halliday had re-created the Tomb of Horrors,
and he’d hidden the Copper Key inside it.
I spent the next few months studying the module and memorizing all of its
maps and room descriptions, in anticipation of the day I would finally figure out
where it was located. But that was the rub: The Limerick didn’t appear to give
any hint as to where Halliday had hidden the damn thing. The only clue seemed
to be “you have much to learn if you hope to earn a place among the high
scorers.”
I recited those words over and over in my head until I wanted to howl in
frustration. Much to learn. Yeah, OK, fine. I have much to learn about what?
There were literally thousands of worlds in the OASIS, and Halliday could
have hidden his re-creation of the Tomb of Horrors on any one of them.
Searching every planet, one by one, would take forever. Even if I’d had the
means to do so.
A planet named Gygax in Sector Two seemed like the obvious place to start
looking. Halliday had coded the planet himself, and he’d named it after Gary
Gygax, one of the creators of Dungeons & Dragons and the author of the
original Tomb of Horrors module. According to Gunterpedia (a gunter wiki), the
planet Gygax was covered with re-creations of old D&D modules, but Tomb of
Horrors was not one of them. There didn’t appear to be a re-creation of the tomb
on any of the other D&D-themed worlds in the OASIS either. Gunters had
turned all of those planets upside down and scoured every square inch of their
surfaces. Had a re-creation of the Tomb of Horrors been hidden on one of them,

it would have been found and logged long ago.
So the tomb had to be hidden somewhere else. And I didn’t have the first clue
where. But I told myself that if I just kept at it and continued doing research, I’d
eventually learn what I needed to know to figure out the tomb’s hiding place. In
fact, that was probably what Halliday meant by “you have much to learn if you
hope to earn a place among the high scorers.”
If any other gunters out there shared my interpretation of the Limerick, so far
they’d been smart enough to keep quiet about it. I’d never seen any posts about
the Tomb of Horrors on any gunter message boards. I realized, of course, that
this might be because my theory about the old D&D module was completely
lame and totally off base.
So I’d continued to watch and read and listen and study, preparing for the day
when I finally stumbled across the clue that would lead me to the Copper Key.
And then it finally happened. Right while I was sitting there daydreaming in
Latin class.

Our teacher, Ms. Rank, was standing at the front of the class, slowly
conjugating Latin verbs. She said them in English first, then in Latin, and each
word automatically appeared on the board behind her as she spoke it. Whenever
we were doing tedious verb conjugation, I always got the lyrics to an old
Schoolhouse Rock! song stuck in my head: “To run, to go, to get, to give. Verb!
You’re what’s happenin’!”
I was quietly humming this tune to myself when Ms. Rank began to conjugate
the Latin for the verb “to learn.” “To Learn. Discere,” she said. “Now, this one
should be easy to remember, because it’s similar to the English word ‘discern,’
which also means ‘to learn.’ ”
Hearing her repeat the phrase “to learn” was enough to make me think of the
Limerick. You have much to learn if you hope to earn a place among the high
scorers.
Ms. Rank continued, using the verb in a sentence. “We go to school to learn,”
she said. “Petimus scholam ut litteras discamus.”
And that was when it hit me. Like an anvil falling out of the sky, directly onto
my skull. I gazed around at my classmates. What group of people has “much to
learn”?
Students. High-school students.
I was on a planet filled with students, all of whom had “much to learn.”
What if the Limerick was saying that the tomb was hidden right here, on
Ludus? The very planet where I’d been twiddling my thumbs for the past five
years?
Then I remembered that ludus was also a Latin word, meaning “school.” I
pulled up my Latin dictionary to double-check the definition, and that was when
I discovered the word had more than one meaning. Ludus could mean “school,”
but it could also mean “sport” or “game.”
Game.
I fell out of my folding chair and landed with a thud on the floor of my

hideout. My OASIS console tracked this movement and attempted to make my
avatar drop to the floor of my Latin classroom, but the classroom conduct
software prevented it from moving and a warning flashed on my display: PLEASE
REMAIN SEATED DURING CLASS!

I told myself not to get too excited. I might be jumping to conclusions. There
were hundreds of private schools and universities located on other planets inside
the OASIS. The Limerick might refer to one of them. But I didn’t think so.
Ludus made more sense. James Halliday had donated billions to fund the
creation of the OASIS public school system here, as a way to demonstrate the
huge potential of the OASIS as an educational tool. And prior to his death,
Halliday had set up a foundation to ensure that the OASIS public school system
would always have the money it needed to operate. The Halliday Learning
Foundation also provided impoverished children around the globe with free
OASIS hardware and Internet access so that they could attend school inside the
OASIS.
GSS’s own programmers had designed and constructed Ludus and all of the
schools on it. So it was entirely possible that Halliday was the one who’d given
the planet its name. And he would also have had access to the planet’s source
code, if he’d wanted to hide something here.
The realizations continued to detonate in my brain like atomic bombs going
off, one after another.
According to the original D&D module, the entrance to the Tomb of Horrors
was hidden near “a low, flat-topped hill, about two hundred yards wide and three
hundred yards long.” The top of the hill was covered with large black stones that
were arranged in such a way that, if you viewed them from a great height, they
resembled the eye sockets, nose holes, and teeth of a human skull.
But if there was a hill like that hidden somewhere on Ludus, wouldn’t
someone have stumbled across it by now?
Maybe not. Ludus had hundreds of large forests scattered all over its surface,
in the vast sections of empty land that stood between the thousands of school
campuses. Some of these forests were enormous, covering dozens of square
miles. Most students never even set foot inside them, because there was nothing
of interest to do or see there. Like its fields and rivers and lakes, Ludus’s forests
were just computer-generated landscaping, placed there to fill up the empty
space.
Of course, during my avatar’s long stay on Ludus, I’d explored a few of the
forests within walking distance of my school, out of boredom. But all they
contained were thousands of randomly generated trees and the occasional bird,
rabbit, or squirrel. (These tiny creatures weren’t worth any experience points if

you killed them. I’d checked.)
So it was entirely possible that somewhere, hidden in one of Ludus’s large,
unexplored patches of forestland, there was a small stone-covered hill that
resembled a human skull.
I tried pulling up a map of Ludus on my display, but I couldn’t. The system
wouldn’t let me, because class was still in session. The hack I used to access
books in the school’s online library didn’t work for the OASIS atlas software.
“Shit!” I blurted out in frustration. The classroom conduct software filtered
this out, so neither Ms. Rank nor my classmates heard it. But another warning
flashed on my display: PROFANITY MUTED—MISCONDUCT WARNING!
I looked at the time on my display. Exactly seventeen minutes and twenty
seconds left until the end of the school day. I sat there with clenched teeth and
counted off each second, my mind still racing.
Ludus was an inconspicuous world in Sector One. There wasn’t supposed to
be anything but schools here, so this was the last place a gunter would think to
look for the Copper Key. It was definitely the last place I had ever thought to
look, and that alone proved it was a perfect hiding place. But why would
Halliday have chosen to hide the Copper Key here? Unless …
He’d wanted a schoolkid to find it.
I was still reeling from the implications of that thought when the bell finally
rang. Around me, the other students began to file out of the room or vanish in
their seats. Ms. Rank’s avatar also disappeared, and in moments I was all alone
in the classroom.
I pulled up a map of Ludus on my display. It appeared as a three-dimensional
globe floating in front of me, and I gave it a spin with my hand. Ludus was a
relatively small planet by OASIS standards, about a third the size of Earth’s
moon, with a circumference of exactly one thousand kilometers. A single
contiguous continent covered the surface. There were no oceans, just a few
dozen large lakes placed here and there. Since OASIS planets weren’t real, they
didn’t have to obey the laws of nature. On Ludus, it was perpetually daytime,
regardless of where you stood on the surface, and the sky was always a perfect
cloudless blue. The stationary sun that hung overheard was nothing but a virtual
light source, programmed into the imaginary sky.
On the map, the school campuses appeared as thousands of identical
numbered rectangles dotting the planet’s surface. They were separated by rolling
green fields, rivers, mountain ranges, and forests. The forests were of all shapes
and sizes, and many of them bordered one of the schools. Next to the map, I
pulled up the Tomb of Horrors module. Near the front, it contained a crude
illustration of the hill concealing the tomb. I took a screenshot of this illustration

and placed it in the corner of my display.
I frantically searched my favorite warez sites until I found a high-end imagerecognition plug-in for the OASIS atlas. Once I downloaded the software via
Guntorrent, it took me a few more minutes to figure out how to make it scan the
entire surface of Ludus for a hill with large black stones arranged in a skull-like
pattern. One with a size, shape, and appearance that matched the illustration
from the Tomb of Horrors module.
After about ten minutes of searching, the software highlighted a possible
match.
I held my breath as I placed the close-up image from the Ludus map beside
the illustration from the D&D module. The shape of the hill and the skull pattern
of the stones both matched the illustration perfectly.
I decreased the magnification on the map a bit, then pulled back far enough to
confirm that the northern edge of the hill ended in a cliff of sand and crumbling
gravel. Just like in the original Dungeons & Dragons module.
I let out a triumphant yell that echoed in the empty classroom and bounced off
the walls of my tiny hideout. I’d done it. I’d actually found the Tomb of Horrors!
When I finally managed to calm down, I did some quick calculations. The hill
was near the center of a large amoeba-shaped forest located on the opposite side
of Ludus, over four hundred kilometers from my school. My avatar could run at
a maximum speed of five kilometers an hour, so it would take me over three
days to get there on foot if I ran nonstop the entire time. If I could teleport, I
could be there within minutes. The fare wouldn’t be much for such a short
distance, maybe a few hundred credits. Unfortunately, that was still more than
my current OASIS account balance, which was a big fat zero.
I considered my options. Aech would lend me the money for the fare, but I
didn’t want to ask for his help. If I couldn’t reach the tomb on my own, I didn’t
deserve to reach it at all. Besides, I’d have to lie to Aech about what the money
was for, and since I’d never asked him for a loan before, any excuse I gave
would make him suspicious.
Thinking about Aech, I couldn’t help but smile. He was really going to freak
when he found out about this. The tomb was hidden less than seventy kilometers
from his school! Practically his backyard.
That thought triggered an idea, one that made me leap to my feet. I ran out of
the classroom and down the hall.
Not only had I figured out a way to teleport to the other side of Ludus, I knew
how to get my school to pay for it.
Each OASIS public school had a bunch of different athletic teams, including
wrestling, soccer, football, baseball, volleyball, and a few other sports that

couldn’t be played in the real world, like Quidditch and zero-gravity Capture the
Flag. Students went out for these teams just like they did at schools in the real
world, and they played using elaborate sports-capable haptic rigs that required
them to actually do all of their own running, jumping, kicking, tackling, and so
on. The teams had nightly practice, held pep rallies, and traveled to other schools
on Ludus to compete against them. Our school gave out free teleportation
vouchers to any student who wanted to attend an away game, so we could sit up
in the stands and root for old OPS #1873. I’d only taken advantage of this once,
when our Capture the Flag team had played against Aech’s school in the OPS
championships.
When I arrived in the school office, I scanned the activities schedule and
found what I was looking for right away. That evening, our football team was
playing an away game against OPS #0571, which was located roughly an hour’s
run from the forest where the tomb was hidden.
I reached out and selected the game, and a teleportation voucher instantly
appeared in my avatar’s inventory, good for one free round-trip to OPS #0571.
I stopped at my locker long enough to drop off my textbooks and grab my
flashlight, sword, shield, and armor. Then I sprinted out the front entrance and
across the expansive green lawn in front of the school.
When I reached the red borderline that marked the edge of the school grounds,
I glanced around to make sure no one was watching me, then stepped across the
line. As I did, the WADE3 nametag floating above my head changed to read
PARZIVAL. Now that I was off school grounds, I could use my avatar name once
again. I could also turn off my nametag completely, which was what I did now,
because I wanted to travel incognito.
The nearest transport terminal was a short walk from the school, at the end of
a cobblestone path. It was a large domed pavilion supported by a dozen ivory
pillars. Each pillar bore an OASIS teleportation icon, a capital “T” in the center
of a blue hexagon. School had only been out for a few minutes now, so there was
a steady stream of avatars filing into the terminal. Inside were long rows of blue
teleportation booths. Their shape and color always reminded me of Doctor
Who’s TARDIS. I stepped into the first empty booth I saw, and the doors closed
automatically. I didn’t need to enter my destination on the touchscreen because it
was already encoded on my voucher. I just slid the voucher into a slot and a
world map of Ludus appeared on the screen, showing a line from my present
location to my destination, a flashing green dot next to OPS #0571. The booth
instantly calculated the distance I would be traveling (462 kilometers) and the
amount my school would be invoiced for the fare (103 credits). The voucher was
verified, the fare showed as PAID, and my avatar vanished.

I instantly reappeared in an identical booth, inside an identical transport
terminal on the opposite side of the planet. As I ran outside, I spotted OPS #0571
off to the south. It looked exactly like my own school, except the surrounding
landscape was different. I spotted some students from my school, walking
toward the nearby football stadium, on their way to watch the game and root for
our team. I wasn’t sure why they bothered. They could just as easily have
watched the game via vidfeed. And any empty seats in the stands would be filled
with randomly generated NPC fans who would wolf down virtual sodas and hot
dogs while cheering wildly. Occasionally, they would even do “the wave.”
I was already running in the opposite direction, across a rolling green field
that stretched out behind the school. A small mountain range loomed in the
distance, and I could see the amoeba-shaped forest at its base.
I turned on my avatar’s autorun feature, then opened my inventory and
selected three of the items listed there. My armor appeared on my body, my
shield appeared in a sling on my back, and my sword appeared in its scabbard,
hanging at my side.
I was almost to the edge of the forest when my phone rang. The ID said it was
Aech. Probably calling to see why I hadn’t logged into the Basement yet. But if I
answered the call, he would see a live video feed of my avatar, running across a
field at top speed, with OPS #0571 shrinking in the distance behind me. I could
conceal my current location by taking the call as audio only, but that might make
him suspicious. So I let the call roll to my vidmail. Aech’s face appeared in a
small window on my display. He was calling from a PvP arena somewhere.
Dozens of avatars were locked in fierce combat on a multitiered playing field
behind him.
“Yo, Z! What are you up to? Jerking off to Ladyhawke?” He flashed his
Cheshire grin. “Give me a shout. I’m still planning to pop some corn and have a
Spaced marathon. You down?” He hung up and his image winked out.
I sent a text-only reply, saying I had a ton of homework and couldn’t hang
tonight. Then I pulled up the Tomb of Horrors module and began to read through
it again, page by page. I did this slowly and carefully, because I was pretty sure it
contained a detailed description of everything I was about to face.
“In the far reaches of the world, under a lost and lonely hill,” read the
module’s introduction, “lies the sinister TOMB OF HORRORS. This labyrinthine
crypt is filled with terrible traps, strange and ferocious monsters, rich and
magical treasures, and somewhere within rests the evil Demi-Lich.”
That last bit worried me. A lich was an undead creature, usually an incredibly
powerful wizard or king who had employed dark magic to bind his intellect to
his own reanimated corpse, thus achieving a perverted form of immortality. I’d

encountered liches in countless videogames and fantasy novels. They were to be
avoided at all costs.
I studied the map of the tomb and the descriptions of its many rooms. The
tomb’s entrance was buried in the side of a crumbling cliff. A tunnel led down
into a labyrinth of thirty-three rooms and chambers, each filled with a variety of
vicious monsters, deadly traps, and (mostly cursed) treasure. If you somehow
managed to survive all of the traps and find your way through the labyrinth, you
would eventually reach the crypt of Acererak the Demi-Lich. The room was
littered with treasure, but if you touched it, the undead King Acererak appeared
and opened up a can of undead whup-ass on you. If, by some miracle, you
managed to defeat the lich, you could take his treasure and leave the dungeon.
Mission accomplished, quest completed.
If Halliday had re-created the Tomb of Horrors just as it was described in the
module, I was in big trouble. My avatar was a third-level wimp, with nonmagical
weapons and twenty-seven measly hit points. Nearly all of the traps and
monsters described in the module could kill me easily. And if I somehow
managed to make it past all of them and reach the crypt, the ultrapowerful lich
could kill my avatar in seconds, just by looking at him.
But I had a few things going for me. First, I really didn’t have much to lose. If
my avatar was killed, I would lose my sword, shield, and leather armor, and the
three levels I’d managed to gain over the past few years. I’d have to create a new
first-level avatar, which would spawn at my last log-in location, in front of my
school locker. But then I could just return to the tomb and try again. And again
and again, every night, collecting XPs and increasing in levels until I finally
figured out where the Copper Key was hidden. (There was no such thing as a
backup avatar. OASIS users could have only one avatar at a time. It was possible
for hackers to use modded visors to spoof their retinal patterns and thus create a
second account for themselves. But if you got caught, you’d be banned from the
OASIS for life, and you’d also be disqualified from participating in Halliday’s
contest. No gunter would ever take that risk.)
My other advantage (I hoped) was that I knew exactly what to expect once I
entered the tomb, because the module provided me with a detailed map of the
entire labyrinth. It also told me where all the traps were located, and how to
disarm or avoid them. I also knew which rooms contained monsters, and where
all of the weapons and treasure were hidden. Unless, of course, Halliday had
changed things around. Then I was screwed. But at the moment, I was far too
excited to be worried. After all, I’d just made the biggest, most important
discovery of my life. I was just a few minutes away from the hiding place of the
Copper Key!

I finally reached the edge of the forest and ran inside. It was filled with
thousands of perfectly rendered maples, oaks, spruces, and tamaracks. The trees
looked as though they had been generated and placed using standard OASIS
landscape templates, but the detail put into them was stunning. I stopped to
examine one of the trees closely and saw ants crawling along the intricate ridges
in its bark. I took this as a sign I was on the right track.
There was no path through the forest, so I kept the map in the corner of my
display and followed it to the skull-topped hill that marked the tomb entrance. It
was right where the map said it would be, in a large glade at the center of the
forest. As I stepped into the clearing, my heart felt like it was trying to beat its
way out of my rib cage.
I climbed up onto the low hilltop, and it was like stepping into the illustration
from the D&D module. Halliday had reproduced everything exactly. Twelve
massive black stones were arranged on the hilltop in the same pattern,
resembling the features of a human skull.
I walked to the northern edge of the hilltop and descended the crumbling cliff
face I found there. By consulting the module map, I was able to locate the exact
spot in the cliff where the entrance to the tomb was supposed to be buried. Then,
using my shield as a shovel, I began to dig. Within a few minutes, I uncovered
the mouth of a tunnel that led into a dark underground corridor. The floor of the
corridor was a mosaic of colorful stones, with a winding path of red tiles set into
it. Once again, just like in the D&D module.
I moved the Tomb of Horrors dungeon map to the top right corner of my
display and made it slightly transparent. Then I strapped my shield to my back
and took out my flashlight. I glanced around once more to make sure no one was
watching me; then, clutching my sword in my other hand, I entered the Tomb of
Horrors.

The walls of the corridor leading into the tomb were covered with dozens of
strange paintings depicting enslaved humans, orcs, elves, and other creatures.
Each fresco appeared in the exact location described in the original D&D
module. I knew that hidden in the tiled stone surface of the floor were several
spring-loaded trapdoors. If you stepped on one, it snapped open and dropped you
into a pit filled with poisoned iron spikes. But because the location of each
hidden trapdoor was clearly marked on my map, I was able to avoid all of them.
So far, everything had followed the original module to the letter. If the same
was true for the rest of the tomb, I might be able to survive long enough to locate
the Copper Key. There were only a few monsters lurking in this dungeon—a
gargoyle, a skeleton, a zombie, some asps, a mummy, and the evil demi-lich
Acererak himself. Since the map told me where each of them was hiding, I
should be able to avoid fighting them. Unless, of course, one of them was
guarding the Copper Key. And I could already guess who probably had that
honor.
I tried to proceed carefully, as if I had no idea what to expect.
Avoiding the Sphere of Annihilation located at the end of the corridor, I
located a hidden door beside the last pit trap. It opened into a small sloping
passageway. My flashlight reached into the darkness ahead, flickering off the
damp stone walls. My surroundings made me feel like I was in a low-budget
sword-and-sorcery flick, like Hawk the Slayer or The Beastmaster.
I began to make my way through the dungeon, room by room. Even though I
knew where all of the traps were located, I still had to proceed carefully to avoid
them all. In a dark, forbidding chamber known as the Chapel of Evil, I found
thousands of gold and silver coins hidden in the pews, right where they were
supposed to be. It was more money than my avatar could carry, even with the
Bag of Holding that I found. I gathered up as many of the gold coins as I could
and they appeared in my inventory. The currency was automatically converted
and my credit counter jumped to over twenty thousand, by far the largest amount

of money I’d ever had. And in addition to the credits, my avatar received an
equal number of experience points for obtaining the coins.
As I continued deeper into the tomb, I obtained several magic items along the
way. A +1 Flaming Sword. A Gem of Seeing. A +1 Ring of Protection. I even
found a suit of +3 Full Plate armor. These were the first magic items my avatar
had ever possessed, and they made me feel unstoppable.
When I put on the suit of magical armor, it shrank to fit my avatar perfectly.
Its gleaming chrome appearance reminded me of the bad-ass armor worn by the
knights in Excalibur. I actually switched to a third-person view for a few
seconds, just to admire how cool my avatar looked wearing it.
The farther I went, the more confident I became. The tomb’s layout and
contents continued to match the module description exactly, down to the last
detail. That is, until I reached the Pillared Throne Room.
It was a large square chamber with a high ceiling, filled with dozens of
massive stone columns. A huge raised dais stood at the far end of the room, atop
which rested an obsidian throne inlaid with silver and ivory skulls.
All this matched the module description exactly, with one huge difference.
The throne was supposed to be empty, but it wasn’t. The demi-lich Acererak was
sitting on it, glaring down at me silently. A dusty gold crown glinted on his
withered head. He appeared exactly as he did on the cover of the original Tomb
of Horrors module. But according to its text, Acererak wasn’t supposed to be
here. He was supposed to be waiting in a burial chamber much deeper in the
dungeon.
I considered running but decided against it. If Halliday had placed the lich in
this room, perhaps he’d placed the Copper Key here too. I had to find out.
I walked across the chamber to the foot of the dais. From here I could see the
lich more clearly. His teeth were two rows of pointed cut diamonds arrayed in a
lipless grin, and a large ruby was set in each of his eye sockets.
For the first time since entering the tomb, I wasn’t sure what to do next.
My chances of surviving one-on-one combat with a demi-lich were
nonexistent. My wimpy +1 Flaming Sword couldn’t even affect him, and the two
magic rubies in his eye sockets had the power to suck out my avatar’s life force
and kill me instantly. Even a party of six or seven high-level avatars would have
had a difficult time defeating him.
I silently wished (not for the last time) that the OASIS was like an old
adventure game and that I could save my place. But it wasn’t, and I couldn’t. If
my avatar died here, it would mean starting over with nothing. But there was no
point in hesitating now. If the lich killed me, I would come back tomorrow night
and try again. The entire tomb should reset when the OASIS server clock struck

midnight. If it did, all of the hidden traps I’d disarmed would reset themselves,
and the treasure and magic items would reappear.
I tapped the Record icon at the edge of my display so that whatever happened
next would be stored in a vidcap file I could play back and study later. But when
I tapped the icon, I got a RECORDING NOT ALLOWED message. It seemed that
Halliday had disabled recording inside the tomb.
I took a deep breath, raised my sword, and placed my right foot on the bottom
step of the dais. As I did, there was a sound like cracking bones as Acererak
slowly lifted his head. The rubies in his eye sockets began to glow with an
intense red light. I took several steps backward, expecting him to leap down and
attack me. But he didn’t rise from his throne. Instead, he lowered his head and
fixed me with his chilling gaze. “Greetings, Parzival,” he said in a rasping voice.
“What is it that you seek?”
This caught me off guard. According to the module, the lich wouldn’t speak.
He was just supposed to attack, leaving me with no choice but to kill him or run
for my life.
“I seek the Copper Key,” I replied. Then I remembered I was speaking to a
king, so I quickly bowed my head, dropped to one knee, and added, “Your
Majesty.”
“Of course you do,” Acererak said, motioning for me to rise. “And you’ve
come to the right place.” He stood, and his mummified skin cracked like old
leather as he moved. I clutched my sword more tightly, still anticipating an
attack.
“How can I know that you are worthy of possessing the Copper Key?” he
asked.
Holy shit! How the hell was I supposed to answer that? And what if I gave the
wrong answer? Would he suck out my soul and incinerate me?
I racked my brain for a suitable reply. The best I could come up with was,
“Allow me to prove my worth, noble Acererak.”
The lich let out a long, disturbing cackle that echoed off the chamber’s stone
walls. “Very well!” he said. “You shall prove your worth by facing me in a
joust!”
I’d never heard of an undead lich king challenging someone to a joust.
Especially not in a subterranean burial chamber. “All right,” I said uncertainly.
“But won’t we be needing horses for that?”
“Not horses,” he replied, stepping away from his throne. “Birds.”
He waved a skeletal hand at his throne. There was a brief flash of light,
accompanied by a transformation sound effect (which I was pretty sure had been
lifted from the old Super Friends cartoon). The throne melted and morphed into

an old coin-operated videogame cabinet. Two joysticks protruded from its
control panel, one yellow and one blue. I couldn’t help but grin as I read the
name on the game’s backlit marquee: JOUST. Williams Electronics, 1982.
“Best two out of three games,” Acererak rasped. “If you win, I shall grant you
what you seek.”
“What if you win?” I asked, already knowing the answer.
“If I am victorious,” the lich said, the rubies in his eye sockets blazing even
brighter, “then you shall die!” A ball of swirling orange flame appeared in his
right hand. He raised it threateningly.
“Of course,” I said. “That was my first guess. Just wanted to double-check.”
The fireball in Acererak’s hand vanished. He stretched out his leathery palm,
which now held two shiny quarters. “The games are on me,” he said. He stepped
up to the Joust machine and dropped both quarters into the left coin slot. The
game emitted two low electronic chimes and the credit counter jumped from
zero to two.
Acererak took hold of the yellow joystick on the left side of the control panel
and closed his bony fingers around it. “Art thou ready?” he croaked.
“Yeah,” I said, taking a deep breath. I cracked my knuckles and grabbed the
Player Two joystick with my left hand, poising my right hand over the Flap
button.
Acererak rocked his head from left to right, cracking his neck. It sounded like
a snapping tree branch. Then he slapped the Two Player button and the joust
began.
Joust was a classic ’80s arcade game with a strange premise. Each player
controls a knight armed with a lance. Player One is mounted on an ostrich, while
Player Two is mounted on a stork. You flap your wings to fly around the screen
and “joust” with the other player, and also against several computer-controlled
enemy knights (who are all mounted on buzzards). When you crash into an
opponent, whoever’s lance is higher on the screen wins the joust. The loser is
killed and loses a life. Whenever you kill one of the enemy knights, his buzzard
craps out a green egg that quickly hatches into another enemy knight if you don’t
scoop it up in time. There’s also a winged pterodactyl that appears once in a
while to wreak havoc.
I hadn’t played Joust in over a year. It was one of Aech’s favorite games, and
for a while he’d had a Joust cabinet in his chat room. He used to challenge me to
a game whenever he wanted to settle an argument or some asinine pop-culture
dispute. For a few months, we played almost every day. In the beginning, Aech
was slightly better than I was, and he had a habit of gloating over his victories.
This had really irked me, so I started practicing Joust on my own, playing a few

games a night against an AI opponent. I honed my skills until I finally got good
enough to beat Aech, repeatedly and consistently. Then I began to gloat over
him, savoring my revenge. The last time we’d played, I’d rubbed his nose in
defeat so mercilessly that he’d flipped out and vowed never to play me again.
Since then, we’d used Street Fighter II to settle our disputes.
My Joust skills were a lot rustier than I thought. I spent the first five minutes
just trying to relax and to reacquaint myself with the controls and the rhythm of
the game. During this time, Acererak managed to kill me twice, mercilessly
slamming his winged mount into mine at the perfect trajectory. He handled the
game’s controls with the calculated perfection of a machine. Which, of course,
was exactly what he was—cutting-edge NPC artificial intelligence, programmed
by Halliday himself.
By the end of our first game, the moves and tricks I’d picked up during all
those marathon bouts with Aech were starting to come back to me. But Acererak
didn’t need a warm-up. He was in perfect form from the outset, and there was no
way I could make up for my weak showing at the start of the game. He killed off
my last man before I even cleared 30,000 points. Embarrassing.
“One game down, Parzival,” he said, flashing a rictus grin. “One more to go.”
He didn’t waste time by making me stand there and watch him play out the
rest of his game. He reached up and found the power switch at the rear of the
game cabinet, then flipped it off and back on. After the screen cycled through its
chromatic Williams Electronics boot-up sequence, he snatched two more
quarters out of thin air and dropped them into the game.
“Art thou ready?” he inquired again, hunching over the control panel.
I hesitated a moment, then asked, “Actually, would you mind if we switched
sides? I’m used to playing on the left.”
It was true. When Aech and I played in the Basement, I always took the
ostrich side. Being on the right side during the first game had screwed up my
rhythm a bit.
Acererak appeared to consider my request for a moment. Then he nodded.
“Certainly,” he said. He stepped back from the cabinet and we switched sides. It
suddenly occurred to me just how absurd this scene was: a guy wearing a suit of
armor, standing next to an undead king, both hunched over the controls of a
classic arcade game. It was the sort of surreal image you’d expect to see on the
cover of an old issue of Heavy Metal or Dragon magazine.
Acererak slapped the Two Player button, and my eyes locked on the screen.
The next game started out badly for me too. My opponent’s movements were
relentless and precise, and I spent the first few waves just trying to evade him. I
was also distracted by the incessant click of his skeletal index finger as he tapped

his Flap button.
I unclenched my jaw and cleared my mind, forcing myself not to think about
where I was, who I was playing against, or what was at stake. I tried to imagine
that I was back in the Basement, playing against Aech.
It worked. I slipped into the zone, and the tide began to turn in my favor. I
began to find the flaws in the lich’s playing style, the holes in his programming.
This was something I’d learned over the years, mastering hundreds of different
videogames. There was always a trick to beating a computer-controlled
opponent. At a game like this, a gifted human player could always triumph over
the game’s AI, because software couldn’t improvise. It could either react
randomly, or in a limited number of predetermined ways, based on a finite
number of preprogrammed conditions. This was an axiom in videogames, and
would be until humans invented true artificial intelligence.
Our second game came right down to the wire, but by the end of it, I’d spotted
a pattern to the lich’s playing technique. By changing my ostrich’s direction at a
certain moment, I could get him to slam his stork into one of the oncoming
buzzards. By repeating this move, I was able to pick off his extra lives, one by
one. I died several times myself in the process, but I finally took him down
during the tenth wave, with no extra lives of my own to spare.
I stepped back from the machine and sighed with relief. I could feel rivulets of
sweat running down my forehead and around the edge of my visor. I wiped at
my face with the sleeve of my shirt, and my avatar mimicked this motion.
“Good game,” Acererak said. Then, to my surprise, he offered me his
withered claw of a hand. I shook it, chuckling nervously as I did so.
“Yeah,” I replied. “Good game, man.” It occurred to me that, in a weird way, I
was actually playing against Halliday. I quickly pushed the thought out of my
head, afraid I might psych myself out.
Acererak once again produced two quarters and dropped them into the Joust
machine. “This one is for all the marbles,” he said. “Art thou ready?”
I nodded. This time, I took the liberty of slapping the Two Player button
myself.
Our final tie-breaking game lasted longer than the first two combined. During
the final wave, so many buzzards filled the screen that it was hard to move
without getting dusted by one of them. The lich and I faced off one final time, at
the very top of the playing field, both of us incessantly hitting our Flap buttons
while slamming our joysticks left and right. Acererak made a final, desperate
move to avoid my charge and dropped a micrometer too low. His final mount
died in a tiny pixelated explosion.
PLAYER TWO GAME OVER appeared on the screen, and the lich let out a long

bloodcurdling howl of rage. He smashed an angry fist into the side of the Joust
cabinet, shattering it into a million tiny pixels that scattered and bounced across
the floor. Then he turned to face me. “Congratulations, Parzival,” he said,
bowing low. “You played well.”
“Thank you, noble Acererak,” I replied, resisting the urge to jump up and
down and shake my ass victoriously in his general direction. Instead, I solemnly
returned his bow. As I did, the lich transformed into a tall human wizard dressed
in flowing black robes. I recognized him immediately. It was Halliday’s avatar,
Anorak.
I stared at him, utterly speechless. For years gunters had speculated that
Anorak still roamed the OASIS, now as an autonomous NPC. Halliday’s ghost in
the machine.
“Now,” the wizard said, speaking with Halliday’s familiar voice. “Your
reward.”
The chamber filled with the sound of a full orchestra. Triumphant horns were
quickly joined by a stirring string section. I recognized the music. It was the last
track from John Williams’s original Star Wars score, used in the scene where
Princess Leia gives Luke and Han their medals (and Chewbacca, as you may
recall, gets the shaft).
As the music built to a crescendo, Anorak stretched out his right hand. There,
resting in his open palm, was the Copper Key, the item for which millions of
people had been searching for the past five years. As he handed it to me, the
music faded out, and in the same instant, I heard a chime sound. I’d just gained
fifty thousand experience points, enough to raise my avatar all the way up to
tenth level.
“Farewell, Sir Parzival,” Anorak said. “I bid you good luck on your quest.”
And before I could ask what I was supposed to do next, or where I could find the
first gate, his avatar vanished in a flash of light, accompanied by a teleportation
sound effect I knew was lifted from the old ’80s Dungeons & Dragons cartoon.
I found myself standing alone on the empty dais. I looked down at the Copper
Key in my hand and felt overcome with wonder and elation. It looked just as it
had in Anorak’s Invitation: a simple antique copper key, its oval-shaped bow
embossed with the roman numeral “I.” I turned it over in my avatar’s hand,
watching the torchlight play across the roman numeral, and that was when I
spotted two small lines of text engraved into the metal. I tilted the key up to the
light and read them aloud: “What you seek lies hidden in the trash on the deepest
level of Daggorath.”
I didn’t even need to read it a second time. I instantly understood its meaning.
I knew exactly where I needed to go and what I would have to do once I got

there.
“Hidden in the trash” was a reference to the ancient TRS-80 line of computers
made by Tandy and Radio Shack in the ’70s and ’80s. Computer users of that era
had given the TRS-80 the derogatory nickname of “Trash 80.”
What you seek lies hidden in the trash.
Halliday’s first computer had been a TRS-80, with a whopping 16K of RAM.
And I knew exactly where to find a replica of that computer in the OASIS. Every
gunter did.
In the early days of the OASIS, Halliday had created a small planet named
Middletown, named after his hometown in Ohio. The planet was the site of a
meticulous re-creation of his hometown as it was in the late 1980s. That saying
about how you can never go home again? Halliday had found a way.
Middletown was one of his pet projects, and he’d spent years coding and
refining it. And it was well known (to gunters, at least) that one of the most
detailed and accurate parts of the Middletown simulation was the re-creation of
Halliday’s boyhood home.
I’d never been able to visit it, but I’d seen hundreds of screenshots and
vidcaps of the place. Inside Halliday’s bedroom was a replica of his first
computer, a TRS-80 Color Computer 2. I was positive that was where he’d
hidden the First Gate. And the second line of text inscribed on the Copper Key
told me how to reach it:
On the deepest level of Daggorath.
Dagorath was a word in Sindarin, the Elvish language J. R. R. Tolkien had
created for The Lord of the Rings. The word dagorath meant “battle,” but
Tolkien had spelled the word with just one “g,” not two. “Daggorath” (with two
“g”s) could refer only to one thing: an incredibly obscure computer game called
Dungeons of Daggorath released in 1982. The game had been made for just one
platform, the TRS-80 Color Computer.
Halliday had written in Anorak’s Almanac that Dungeons of Daggorath was
the game that made him decide he wanted to become a videogame designer.
And Dungeons of Daggorath was one of the games sitting in the shoebox next
to the TRS-80 in the re-creation of Halliday’s childhood bedroom.
So all I had to do was teleport to Middletown, go to Halliday’s house, sit
down at his TRS-80, play the game, reach the bottom level of the dungeon,
and … that was where I’d find the First Gate.
At least, that was my interpretation.
Middletown was in Sector Seven, a long way from Ludus. But I’d collected
more than enough gold and treasure to pay for the teleportation fare to get there.
By my avatar’s previous standards, I was now filthy rich.

I checked the time: 11:03 p.m., OST (OASIS Server Time, which also
happened to be Eastern Standard Time). I had eight hours before I had to be at
school. That might be enough time. I could go for it, right now. Sprint like hell,
back up through the dungeon to the surface, then hightail it back to the nearest
transport terminal. From there, I could teleport directly to Middletown. If I left
right now, I should be able to reach Halliday’s TRS-80 in under an hour.
I knew I should get some sleep first. I’d been logged into the OASIS for
almost fifteen solid hours. And tomorrow was Friday. I could teleport to
Middletown right after school and then I’d have the whole weekend to tackle the
First Gate.
But who was I kidding? There was no way I’d be able to sleep tonight, or sit
through school tomorrow. I had to go now.
I began to sprint for the exit, but then stopped in the middle of the chamber.
Through the open door, I saw a long shadow bouncing on the wall, accompanied
by the echo of approaching footsteps.
A few seconds later, the silhouette of an avatar appeared in the doorway. I was
about to reach for my sword when I realized I was still holding the Copper Key
in my hand. I shoved it into a pouch on my belt and fumbled my sword out of its
scabbard. As I raised my blade, the avatar spoke.

“Who the hell are you?” the silhouette demanded. The voice sounded like it
belonged to a young woman. One who was itching for a fight.
When I failed to answer, a stocky female avatar stepped out of the shadows
and into the chamber’s flickering torchlight. She had raven hair, styled Joan-ofArc short, and appeared to be in her late teens or early twenties. As she got
closer, I realized that I knew her. We’d never actually met, but I recognized her
face from the dozens of screenshots she’d posted to her blog over the years.
It was Art3mis.
She wore a suit of scaled gunmetal-blue armor that looked more sci-fi than
fantasy. Twin blaster pistols were slung low on her hips in quickdraw holsters,
and there was a long, curved elvish sword in a scabbard across her back. She
wore fingerless Road Warrior–style racing gloves and a pair of classic Ray-Ban
shades. Overall, she seemed to be going for a sort of mid-’80s postapocalyptic
cyberpunk girl-next-door look. And it was working for me, in a big way. In a
word: hot.
As she walked toward me, the heels of her studded combat boots clicked on
the stone floor. She halted just out of my sword’s reach but did not draw her own
blade. Instead, she slid her shades up onto her avatar’s forehead—a blatant
affectation, since sunglasses didn’t actually affect a player’s vision—and looked
me up and down, making a show of sizing me up.
For a moment I was too star-struck to speak. To break my paralysis, I
reminded myself that the person operating the avatar in front of me might not be
a woman at all. This “girl,” whom I’d been cyber-crushing on for the past three
years, might very well be an obese, hairy-knuckled guy named Chuck. Once I’d
conjured up that sobering image, I was able to focus on my situation, and the
question at hand: What was she doing here? After five years of searching, I
thought it was highly improbable that we’d both discovered the Copper Key’s
hiding place on the same night. Too big of a coincidence.
“Cat got your tongue?” she asked. “I said: Who. The hell. Are you?”

Like her, I had my avatar’s nametag switched off. Clearly, I wanted to remain
anonymous, especially under the circumstances. Couldn’t she take the hint?
“Greetings,” I said, bowing slightly. “I am Juan Sánchez Villa-Lobos
Ramírez.”
She smirked. “Chief metallurgist to King Charles the Fifth of Spain?”
“At your service,” I replied, grinning. She’d caught my obscure Highlander
quote and thrown another right back at me. It was Art3mis, all right.
“Cute.” She glanced over my shoulder, up at the empty dais, then back at me.
“So, spill it. How did you do?”
“Do at what?”
“Jousting against Acererak?” she said, as if it were obvious.
Suddenly, I understood. This wasn’t the first time she’d been here. I wasn’t the
first gunter to decipher the Limerick and find the Tomb of Horrors. Art3mis had
beaten me to it. And since she knew about the Joust game, she’d obviously
already faced the lich herself. But if she already had the Copper Key, there
wouldn’t be any reason for her to come back here. So she clearly didn’t have the
key yet. She’d faced the lich at Joust and he’d beaten her. So she’d come back to
try again. For all I knew, this could be her eighth or ninth attempt. And she
obviously assumed the lich had beaten me, too.
“Hello?” she said, tapping her right foot impatiently. “I’m waiting?”
I considered making a break for it. Just running right past her, back out
through the labyrinth and up to the surface. But if I ran, she might suspect that I
had the key and decide to try to kill me to get it. The surface of Ludus was
clearly marked as a safe zone on the OASIS map, so no player-versus-player
combat was allowed. But I had no way of knowing if the same was true of this
tomb, because it was underground, and it didn’t even appear on the planet map.
Art3mis looked like a formidable opponent. Body armor. Blaster pistols. And
that elvish sword she was carrying might be vorpal. If even half of the exploits
she’d mentioned on her blog were true, her avatar was probably at least fiftieth
level. Or higher. If PvP combat was permitted down here, she’d kick my tenthlevel ass.
So I had to play this cool. I decided to lie.
“I got creamed,” I said. “Joust isn’t really my game.”
She relaxed her posture slightly. That seemed to be the answer she wanted to
hear. “Yeah, same here,” she said in a commiserating tone. “Halliday
programmed old King Acererak with some pretty wicked AI, didn’t he? He’s
insanely hard to beat.” She glanced down at my sword, which I was still
brandishing defensively. “You can put that away. I’m not gonna bite you.”
I kept my sword raised. “Is this tomb in a PvP zone?”

“Dunno. You’re the first avatar I’ve ever run into down here.” She tilted her
head slightly and smiled. “I suppose there’s only one way to find out.”
She drew her sword, lightning fast, and turned into a clockwise spin, bringing
its glowing blade around and down at me, all in a single blur of motion. At the
last second, I managed to tilt my own blade upward to awkwardly parry the
attack. But both of our swords halted in midair, inches apart, as if held back by
some invisible force. A message flashed on my display: PLAYER-VERSUS-PLAYER
COMBAT NOT PERMITTED HERE!

I breathed a sigh of relief. (I wouldn’t learn until later that the keys were
nontransferable. You couldn’t drop one of them, or give them to another avatar.
And if you were killed while holding one, it vanished right along with your
body.)
“Well, there you have it,” she said, grinning. “This is a no-PvP zone after all.”
She whipped her sword around in a figure-eight pattern, then smoothly replaced
it in the scabbard on her back. Very slick.
I sheathed my own sword too, but without any fancy moves. “Halliday must
not have wanted anyone to duel for the right to joust the king,” I said.
“Yeah,” she said, grinning. “Lucky for you.”
“Lucky for me?” I replied, folding my arms. “How do you figure?”
She motioned to the empty dais behind me. “You must really be hurting for hit
points right now, after fighting Acererak.”
So … if Acererak beat you at Joust, then you had to fight him. Good thing I
won, I thought. Or else I’d probably be creating a new avatar right about now.
“I’ve got hit points galore,” I fibbed. “That lich was a total wuss.”
“Oh really?” she said suspiciously. “I’m fifty-second level, and he’s nearly
killed me every time I’ve had to fight him. I have to stock up on extra healing
potions every time I come down here.” She eyed me a moment, then said, “I also
recognize your sword and the armor you’re wearing. You got them both right
here in this dungeon, which means they’re better than whatever your avatar had
before. You look like a low-level wimpazoid to me, Juan Ramírez. And I think
you’re hiding something.”
Now that I knew she couldn’t attack me, I considered telling her the truth.
Why not just whip out the Copper Key and show it to her? But I thought better
of it. The smart move now was to split and head straight for Middletown while I
still had a head start. She still didn’t have the key and might not get it for several
more days. If I hadn’t already had so many hours of Joust practice under my belt,
God knows how many attempts it would have taken me to beat Acererak.
“Think what you want, She-Ra,” I said, moving past her. “Maybe I’ll run in to
you off-world sometime. We can duke it out then.” I gave her a small wave. “See

ya ’round.”
“Where do you think you’re going?” she said, following me.
“Home,” I said, still walking.
“But what about the lich? And the Copper Key?” She motioned to the empty
dais. “He’ll respawn in a few minutes. When the OASIS server clock hits
midnight, the whole tomb resets. If you wait right here, you’ll get another shot at
beating him, without having to make your way through all of those traps again
first. That’s why I’ve been coming here just before midnight, every other day. So
I can get in two attempts in a row, back-to-back.”
Clever. If I hadn’t succeeded on my first try, I wondered how long it would
have taken me to figure that out. “I thought we could take turns playing against
him,” I said. “I just played him, so it’ll be your turn at midnight, OK? Then I’ll
come back after midnight tomorrow. We can alternate days until one of us beats
him. Sound fair?”
“I suppose,” she said, studying me. “But you should stick around anyway.
Something different might happen if there are two avatars here at midnight.
Anorak probably prepared for that contingency. Maybe two instances of the lich
will appear, one for each of us to play? Or maybe—”
“I prefer to play in private,” I said. “Let’s just take turns, OK?” I was almost
to the exit when she stepped in front of me, blocking my path.
“Come on, hold up a second,” she said, her voice softening. “Please?”
I could have kept walking, right through her avatar. But I didn’t. I was
desperate to get to Middletown and locate the First Gate, but I was also standing
in front of the famous Art3mis, someone I’d fantasized about meeting for years.
And she was even cooler in person than I’d imagined. I was dying to spend more
time with her. I wanted, as the ’80s poet Howard Jones would say, to get to know
her well. If I left now, I might never run into her again.
“Listen,” she said, glancing at her boots. “I apologize for calling you a lowlevel wimpazoid. That was not cool. I insulted you.”
“It’s OK. You were right, actually. I’m only tenth level.”
“Regardless, you’re a fellow gunter. And a clever one too, or you wouldn’t be
standing here. So, I want you to know that I respect you, and acknowledge your
skills. And I apologize for the trash talk.”
“Apology accepted. No worries.”
“Cool.” She looked relieved. Her avatar’s facial expressions were extremely
realistic, which usually meant they were synched to those of their operator
instead of controlled by software. She must’ve been using an expensive rig. “I
was just a little freaked to find you here,” she said. “I mean, I knew someone else
would find this place eventually. Just not this quickly. I’ve had this tomb all to

myself for a while now.”
“How long?” I asked, not really expecting her to say.
She hesitated, then began to ramble. “Three weeks!” she said, exasperated.
“I’ve been coming here for three freakin’ weeks, trying to beat that stupid lich at
that asinine game! And his AI is ridiculous! I mean, you know. I’d never even
played Joust before this, and now it’s driving me out of my gourd! I swear I was
this close to finally beating his ass a few days ago, but then …” She raked her
fingers through her hair in frustration. “Argh! I can’t sleep. I can’t eat. My
grades are going down the tubes, because I’ve been ditching to practice Joust—”
I was about to ask if she went to school here on Ludus, but she continued to
talk, faster and faster, as if a floodgate had opened in her brain. The words just
poured out of her. She was barely pausing to breathe.
“—and I came here tonight, thinking this would be the night I finally beat that
bastard and get the Copper Key, but when I got here, I saw that someone had
already uncovered the entrance. So I realized my worst fear had finally come
true. Someone else had found the tomb. So I ran all the way down here, totally
freaking out. I mean, I wasn’t too worried, because I didn’t think anyone could
possibly beat Acererak on their first try, but still—” She paused to take a deep
breath and stopped abruptly.
“Sorry,” she said a second later. “I tend to ramble when I’m nervous. Or
excited. And right now I’m sort of both, because I’ve been dying to talk to
someone about all of this, but obviously I couldn’t tell a soul, right? You can’t
just mention in casual conversation that you—” She cut herself off again. “Man,
I’m such a motormouth! A jabberjaw. A flibbertigibbet.” She mimed zipping her
lips, locking them, and tossing away the imaginary key. Without thinking, I
mimed grabbing the key out of the air and unlocking her lips. This made her
laugh—an honest, genuine laugh that involved a fair amount of snorting, which
made me laugh too.
She was so charming. Her geeky demeanor and hyperkinetic speech pattern
reminded me of Jordan, my favorite character in Real Genius. I’d never felt such
an instant connection with another person, in the real world or in the OASIS. Not
even with Aech. I felt light-headed.
When she finally got her laughter under control, she said, “I really need to set
up a filter to edit out that laugh of mine.”
“No, you shouldn’t,” I said. “It’s a pretty great laugh, actually.” I was wincing
at every word coming out of my mouth. “I have a dorky laugh too.”
Great, Wade, I thought. You just called her laugh “dorky.” Real smooth.
But she just gave me a shy smile and mouthed the words “thank you.”
I felt a sudden urge to kiss her. Simulation or not, I didn’t care. I was working

up the courage to ask for her contact card when she stuck out her hand.
“I forgot to introduce myself,” she said. “I’m Art3mis.”
“I know,” I said, shaking her hand. “I’m actually a huge fan of your blog. I’ve
been a loyal reader for years.”
“Seriously?” Her avatar actually seemed to blush.
I nodded. “It’s an honor to meet you,” I said. “I’m Parzival.” I realized that I
was still holding her hand and made myself let go.
“Parzival, eh?” She tilted her head slightly. “Named after the knight of the
Round Table who found the grail, right? Very cool.”
I nodded, now even more smitten. I almost always had to explain my name to
people. “And Artemis was the Greek goddess of the hunt, right?”
“Right! But the normal spelling was already taken, so I had to use a leet
spelling, with a number three in place of the ‘e.’ ”
“I know,” I said. “You mentioned that once on your blog. Two years ago.” I
almost cited the date of the actual blog entry before I realized it would make me
sound like even more of a cyber-stalking super-creep. “You said that you still run
into noobs who prounounce it ‘Art-three-miss.’ ”
“That’s right,” she said, grinning at me. “I did.”
She stretched out a racing-gloved hand and offered me one of her contact
cards. You could design your card to look like just about anything. Art3mis had
coded hers to look like a vintage Kenner Star Wars action figure (still in the
blister pack). The figure was a crude plastic rendering of her avatar, with the
same face, hair, and outfit. Tiny versions of her guns and sword were included.
Her contact info was printed on the card, above the figure:
Art3mis
52nd Level Warrior/Mage
(Vehicle Sold Separately)
On the back of the card were links to her blog, e-mail, and phone line.
Not only was this the first time a girl had ever given me her card, it was also,
by far, the coolest contact card I had ever seen.
“This is, by far, the coolest contact card I have ever seen,” I said. “Thank
you!”
I handed her one of my own cards, which I’d designed to look like an original
Atari 2600 Adventure cartridge, with my contact info printed on the label:
Parzival
10th Level Warrior

(Use with Joystick Controller)
“This is awesome!” she said, looking it over. “What a wicked design!”
“Thanks,” I said, blushing under my visor. I wanted to propose marriage.
I added her card to my inventory, and it appeared on my item list, right below
the Copper Key. Seeing the key listed there snapped me back to reality. What the
hell was I doing, standing here making small talk with this girl when the First
Gate was waiting for me? I checked the time. Less than five minutes until
midnight.
“Listen, Art3mis,” I said. “It was truly awesome to meet you. But I gotta get
going. The server is about to reset, and I want to clear out of here before all of
those traps and undead respawn.”
“Oh … OK.” She actually sounded disappointed! “I should probably prepare
for my Joust match anyway. But here, let me hit you with a Cure Serious
Wounds spell before you go.”
Before I could protest, she laid a hand on my avatar’s chest and muttered a
few arcane words. My hit-point counter was already at maximum, so the spell
had no effect. But Art3mis didn’t know that. She was still under the assumption
that I’d had to fight the lich.
“There you go,” she said, stepping back.
“Thanks,” I said. “But you shouldn’t have. We’re competitors, you know.”
“I know. But we can still be friends, right?”
“I hope so.”
“Besides, the Third Gate is still a long way off. I mean, it took five years for
the two of us to get this far. And if I know Halliday’s game-design strategy,
things are just going to get harder from here on out.” She lowered her voice.
“Listen, are you sure you don’t want to stick around? I bet we can both play at
once. We can give each other Jousting tips. I’ve started to spot some flaws in the
king’s technique—”
Now I was starting to feel like a jerk for lying to her. “That’s a really kind
offer. But I have to go.” I searched for a plausible excuse. “I’ve got school in the
morning.”
She nodded, but her expression shifted back to one of suspicion. Then her
eyes widened, as though an idea had just occurred to her. Her pupils began to
dart around, focused on the space in front of her, and I realized she was looking
something up in a browser window. A few seconds later, her face contorted in
anger.
“You lying bastard!” she shouted. “You dishonest sack of crap!” She made her
Web browser window visible to me and spun it around. It displayed the

Scoreboard on Halliday’s website. In all the excitement, I’d forgotten to check it.
It looked just as it had for the past five years, with one change. My avatar’s
name now appeared at the very top of the list, in first place, with a score of
10,000 points beside it. The other nine slots still contained Halliday’s initials,
JDH, followed by zeros.
“Holy shit,” I muttered. When Anorak had handed me the Copper Key, I’d
become the first gunter in history to score points in the contest. And, I realized,
since the Scoreboard was viewable to the entire world, my avatar had just
become famous.
I checked the newsfeed headlines just to be sure. Every single one of them
contained my avatar’s name. Stuff like: MYSTERIOUS AVATAR “PARZIVAL” MAKES
HISTORY and PARZIVAL FINDS COPPER KEY.
I stood there in a daze, forcing myself to breathe. Then Art3mis gave me a
shove, which, of course, I didn’t feel. She did knock my avatar backward a few
feet, though. “You beat him on your first try?” she shouted.
I nodded. “He won the first game, but I won the last two. Just barely, though.”
“Shiiiiiit!” she screamed, clenching her fists. “How in the hell did you beat
him on your first try?” I got the distinct impression she wanted to sock me in the
face.
“It was pure luck,” I said. “I used to play Joust all the time against a friend of
mine. So I’d already had a ton of preparation. I’m sure if you’d had as much
practice—”
“Please!” she growled, holding up a hand. “Do not patronize me, OK?” She
let out what I can only describe as a howl of frustration. “I don’t believe this! Do
you realize I’ve been trying to beat him for five goddamn weeks!”
“But a minute ago you said it was three weeks—”
“Don’t interrupt me!” She gave me another shove. “I’ve been practicing Joust
nonstop for over a month now! I’m seeing flying ostriches in my goddamn
sleep!”
“That can’t be pleasant.”
“And you just walk in here and nail it on the first try!” She started pounding
her fist into the center of her forehead, and I realized she was pissed at herself,
not me.
“Listen,” I said. “It really was luck. I’ve got a knack for classic arcade games.
That’s my specialty.” I shrugged. “Stop hitting yourself like Rain Man, OK?”
She stopped and stared me. After a few seconds, she let out a long sigh. “Why
couldn’t it be Centipede? Or Ms. Pac-Man? Or BurgerTime? Then I’d probably
have already cleared the First Gate by now!”
“Well, I don’t know about that,” I said.

She glared at me a second, then gave me a devilish smile. She turned to face
the exit and began to execute a series of elaborate gestures in the air in front of
her while whispering the words of some incantation.
“Hey,” I said. “Hold on a sec. What are you doing?”
But I already knew. As she finished casting her spell, a giant stone wall
appeared, completely covering the chamber’s only exit. Shit! She’d cast a
Barrier spell. I was trapped inside the room.
“Oh, come on!” I shouted. “Why did you do that?”
“You seemed to be in an awful big hurry to get out of here. My guess is that
when Anorak gave you the Copper Key, he also gave you some sort of clue
about the location of the First Gate. Right? That’s where you’re headed next,
isn’t it?”
“Yeah,” I said. I thought about denying it, but what was the point now?
“So unless you can nullify my spell—and I’m betting you can’t, Mr. TenthLevel Warrior—that barrier will keep you in here until just after midnight, when
the server resets. All of those traps you disarmed on your way down here will
reset. That should slow down your exit considerably.”
“Yes,” I said. “It will.”
“And while you’re busy making your way back up to the surface, I’ll have
another shot at defeating Acererak. And this time I’m gonna destroy him. Then
I’ll be right behind you, mister.”
I folded my arms. “If the king has been beating your ass for the past five
weeks, what makes you think you’re finally going to win tonight?”
“Competition brings out the best in me,” she replied. “It always has. And now
I’ve got some serious competition.”
I glanced over at the magical barrier she’d created. She was over fiftieth level,
so it would remain in existence for the spell’s maximum duration: fifteen
minutes. All I could do was stand there and wait for it to dissipate. “You’re evil,
you know that?” I said.
She grinned and shook her head. “Chaotic Neutral, sugar.”
I grinned back at her. “I’m still going to beat you to the First Gate, you know.”
“Probably,” she said. “But this is just the beginning. You’ll still have to clear
it. And there are still two more keys to find, and two more gates to clear. Plenty
of time for me to catch up with you, and then leave you in the dust, ace.”
“We’ll see about that, lady.”
She motioned to the window displaying the Scoreboard. “You’re famous
now,” she said. “You realize what that means, don’t you?”
“I haven’t had much time to think about it yet.”
“Well, I have. I’ve been thinking about it for the past five weeks. Your

avatar’s name on that Scoreboard is going to change everything. The public will
become obsessed with the contest again, just like when it first began. The media
is already going berserk. By tomorrow, Parzival will be a household name.”
That thought made me a little queasy.
“You could become famous in the real world too,” she said. “If you reveal
your true identity to the media.”
“I’m not an idiot.”
“Good. Because there are billions of dollars up for grabs, and now everyone is
going to assume you know how and where to find the egg. There are a lot of
people who would kill for that information.”
“I know that,” I said. “And I appreciate your concern. But I’ll be fine.”
But I didn’t feel fine. I hadn’t really considered any of this, maybe because I’d
never really believed I would actually be in this position.
We stood there in silence, watching the clock and waiting. “What would you
do if you won?” she suddenly asked. “How would you spend all that money?”
I had spent a lot of time thinking about that. I daydreamed about it all the
time. Aech and I had made absurd lists of things we would do and buy if we won
the prize.
“I don’t know,” I said. “The usual, I guess. Move into a mansion. Buy a bunch
of cool shit. Not be poor.”
“Wow. Big dreamer,” she said. “And after you buy your mansion and your
‘cool shit,’ what will you do with the hundred and thirty billion you’ll have left
over?”
Not wanting her to think I was some shallow idiot, I impulsively blurted out
what I’d always dreamed of doing if I won. It was something I’d never told
anyone.
“I’d have a nuclear-powered interstellar spacecraft constructed in Earth’s
orbit,” I said. “I’d stock it with a lifetime supply of food and water, a selfsustaining biosphere, and a supercomputer loaded with every movie, book, song,
videogame, and piece of artwork that human civilization has ever created, along
with a stand-alone copy of the OASIS. Then I’d invite a few of my closest
friends to come aboard, along with a team of doctors and scientists, and we’d all
get the hell out of Dodge. Leave the solar system and start looking for an
extrasolar Earthlike planet.”
I hadn’t thought this plan all the way through yet, of course. I still had a lot of
details to work out.
She raised an eyebrow. “That’s pretty ambitious,” she said. “But you do
realize that nearly half the people on this planet are starving, right?” I detected
no malice in her voice. She sounded like she genuinely believed I might not be

aware of this fact.
“Yes, I know,” I said defensively. “The reason so many people are starving is
because we’ve wrecked the planet. The Earth is dying, you know? It’s time to
leave.”
“That’s a pretty negative outlook,” she said. “If I win that dough, I’m going to
make sure everyone on this planet has enough to eat. Once we tackle world
hunger, then we can figure out how to fix the environment and solve the energy
crisis.”
I rolled my eyes. “Right,” I said. “And after you pull off that miracle, you can
genetically engineer a bunch of Smurfs and unicorns to frolic around this new
perfect world you’ve created.”
“I’m being serious,” she said.
“You really think it’s that simple?” I said. “That you can just write a check for
two hundred and forty billion dollars and fix all the world’s problems?”
“I don’t know. Maybe not. But I’m gonna give it a shot.”
“If you win.”
“Right. If I win.”
Just then, the OASIS server clock struck midnight. We both knew the second
it happened, because the throne reappeared atop the dais, along with Acererak.
He sat there motionless, looking just like he did when I’d first entered the room.
Art3mis glanced up at him, then back at me. She smiled and gave me a small
wave. “I’ll see you around, Parzival.”
“Yeah,” I replied. “See ya.” She turned and began to walk toward the dais. I
called after her. “Hey, Art3mis?”
She turned back. For some reason I felt compelled to help her, even though I
knew I shouldn’t. “Try playing on the left side,” I said. “That’s how I won. I
think he might be easier to beat if he’s playing the stork.”
She stared at me for a second, possibly trying to gauge whether I was messing
with her. Then she nodded and ascended the dais. Acererak came to life as soon
as she set foot on the first step.
“Greetings, Art3mis,” his voice boomed. “What is it that you seek?”
I couldn’t hear her reply, but a few seconds later the throne transformed into
the Joust game, just as it had earlier. Art3mis said something to the lich and the
two of them switched sides, so that she was on the left. Then they began to play.
I watched them play from a distance until a few minutes later, when her
Barrier spell dissipated. I cast one last glance up at Art3mis, then threw open the
door and ran out.

It took me a little over an hour to make my way back through the tomb and
up to the surface. The instant I crawled outside, a MESSAGES WAITING indicator
began to flash on my display. I realized then that Halliday had placed the tomb
inside a null-communication zone, so no one could receive calls, texts, or e-mail
while they were inside. Probably to prevent gunters from calling for help or
advice.
I checked my messages and saw that Aech had been trying to reach me since
the moment my name appeared on the Scoreboard. He’d called over a dozen
times and had also sent several text messages asking me what in the sweet name
of Christ was going on and screaming at me in ALL CAPS to call him back right
now. Just as I’d finished deleting these messages, I received another incoming
call. It was Aech trying once again to reach me. I decided not to pick up. Instead,
I sent him a short text message, promising to call as soon as I could.
As I ran out of the forest, I kept the Scoreboard up in the corner of my display
so I’d know immediately if Art3mis won her Joust match and obtained the key.
When I finally reached the transport terminal and jumped into the nearest booth,
it was just after two o’clock in the morning.
I entered my destination on the booth’s touchscreen, and a map of Middletown
appeared on the display. I was prompted to select one of the planet’s 256
transport terminals as my arrival point.
When Halliday had created Middletown, he hadn’t placed just a single recreation of his hometown there. He’d made 256 identical copies of it, spread out
evenly across the planet’s surface. I didn’t think it would matter which copy of
his hometown I went to, so I selected one at random, near the equator. Then I
tapped CONFIRM to pay the fare, and my avatar vanished.
A millisecond later, I was standing inside a vintage 1980s phone booth located
inside an old Greyhound bus station. I opened the door and stepped out. It was
like stepping out of a time machine. Several NPCs milled around, all dressed in
mid-1980s attire. A woman with a giant ozone-depleting hairdo bobbed her head

to an oversize Walkman. A kid in a gray Members Only jacket leaned against the
wall, working on a Rubik’s Cube. A Mohawked punk rocker sat in a plastic
chair, watching a Riptide rerun on a coin-operated television.
I located the exit and headed for it, drawing my sword as I went. The entire
surface of Middletown was a PvP zone, so I had to proceed with caution.
Shortly after the Hunt began, this planet had turned into Grand Central
Station, and all 256 copies of Halliday’s hometown had been scoured and
ransacked by an endless parade of gunters, all searching for keys and clues. The
popular theory on the message boards was that Halliday had created multiple
copies of his hometown so that several avatars could search it at the same time
without fighting over a single location. Of course, all of this searching had
yielded a big fat doughnut. No keys. No clues. No egg. Since then, interest in the
planet had waned dramatically. But some gunters probably still came here on
occasion.
If there was already another gunter inside Halliday’s house when I got there,
my plan was to make a run for it, then steal a car and drive twenty-five miles (in
any direction) to the next identical copy of Middletown. And then the next, until
I found an instance of Halliday’s house that was unoccupied.
Outside the bus station, it was a beautiful Midwestern day. The reddish orange
sun hovered low in the sky. Even though I’d never been to Middletown before,
I’d done extensive research on it, so I knew Halliday had coded the planet so that
no matter when you visited or where you were on the surface, it was always a
perfect late-autumn afternoon, circa 1986.
I pulled up a map of the town and traced a route from my current location to
Halliday’s childhood home. It was about a mile to the north. I pointed my avatar
in that direction and began to run. Looking around, I was astounded at the
painstaking attention to detail. I’d read that Halliday had done all of the coding
himself, drawing on his memories to re-create his hometown exactly as it was
during his childhood. He’d used old street maps, phone books, photographs, and
video footage for reference, to make everything as authentic and accurate as
possible.
The place reminded me a lot of the town in the movie Footloose. Small, rural,
and sparsely populated. The houses all seemed incredibly big and were placed
ridiculously far apart. It astounded me that fifty years ago, even lower-income
families had an entire house to themselves. The NPC citizens all looked like
extras from a John Cougar Mellencamp video. I saw people out raking leaves,
walking dogs, and sitting on porches. Out of curiosity, I waved at a few of them
and got a friendly wave in return every time.
Clues as to the time period were everywhere. NPC-piloted cars and trucks

cruised slowly up and down the shady streets, all of them gas-guzzling antiques:
Trans-Ams, Dodge Omnis, IROC Z28s, and K-cars. I passed a service station,
and the sign said gasoline was only ninety-three cents a gallon.
I was about to turn down Halliday’s street when I heard a fanfare of trumpets.
My eyes shot over to the Scoreboard window, still hovering in the corner of my
display.
Art3mis had done it.
Her name now appeared directly below mine. Her score was 9,000 points—a
thousand points less than mine. It appeared that I’d received a bonus for being
the first avatar to obtain the Copper Key.
The full ramifications of the Scoreboard’s existence occurred to me for the
first time. From here on out, it would not only allow gunters to keep track of
each other’s progress, it would also show the entire world who the current
frontrunners were, creating instant celebrities (and targets) in the process.
I knew, at that exact moment, Art3mis must be staring down at her own copy
of the Copper Key, reading the clue engraved on its surface. I was sure she’d be
able to decipher it just as quickly as I had. In fact, she was probably already on
her way to Middletown right now.
That got me moving again. I now had only an hour’s head start on her. Maybe
less.
When I reached Cleveland Avenue, the street on which Halliday had grown
up, I sprinted down the cracked sidewalk to the front steps of his childhood
home. It looked just like the photographs I’d seen: a modest two-story colonial
with red vinyl siding. Two late-’70s Ford sedans were parked in the driveway,
one of them up on cinder blocks.
Looking at the replica Halliday had created of his old house, I tried to imagine
what it had been like for him to grow up there. I’d read that in the real
Middletown, Ohio, every house on this street had been demolished in the late
’90s to make room for a strip mall. But Halliday had preserved his childhood
forever, here in the OASIS.
I ran up the walkway and entered through the front door, which opened into
the living room. I knew this room well, because it appeared in Anorak’s
Invitation. I recognized the simulated wood-grain paneling, the burnt orange
carpet, and garish furniture that looked like it had been scavenged from several
disco-era yard sales.
The house was empty. For whatever reason, Halliday had decided not to place
NPC re-creations of himself or his deceased parents here. Perhaps that would
have been too creepy, even for him. However, I did spot a familiar family photo
on the living room wall. This portrait had been taken at the local Kmart in 1984,

but Mr. and Mrs. Halliday were still dressed in late-’70s fashions. Twelve-yearold Jimmy stood between them, glowering at the camera from behind thick
eyeglasses. The Hallidays looked like an ordinary American family. There was
no hint that the stoic man in the brown leisure suit was an abusive alcoholic, that
the smiling woman in the floral pantsuit was bipolar, or that the young boy in the
faded Asteroids T-shirt would one day create an entirely new universe.
Looking around, I wondered why Halliday, who always claimed to have had a
miserable childhood, had later become so nostalgic for it. I knew that if and
when I finally escaped from the stacks, I’d never look back. And I definitely
wouldn’t create a detailed simulation of the place.
I glanced over at the bulky Zenith television and the Atari 2600 connected to
it. The simulated wood grain on the Atari’s plastic casing perfectly matched the
simulated wood grain on the television cabinet and on the living room walls.
Beside the Atari was a shoebox containing nine game cartridges: Combat, Space
Invaders, Pitfall, Kaboom!, Star Raiders, The Empire Strikes Back, Starmaster,
Yars’ Revenge, and E.T. Gunters had attached a large amount of significance to
the absence of Adventure, the game Halliday was seen playing on this very same
Atari at the end of Anorak’s Invitation. People had searched the entire
Middletown simulation for a copy of it, but there didn’t appear to be one
anywhere on the whole planet. Gunters had brought copies of Adventure here
from other planets, but when they tried to play them on Halliday’s Atari, they
never worked. So far, no one had been able to figure out why.
I did a quick search of the rest of the house and made sure no other avatars
were present. Then I opened the door of James Halliday’s room. It was empty, so
I stepped inside and locked the door. Screenshots and simcaps of this room had
been available for years, and I’d studied all of them closely. But this was my first
time standing inside the “real thing.” I got chills.
The carpet was a horrendous mustard color. So was the wallpaper. But the
walls were almost entirely covered with movie and rock band posters: Real
Genius, WarGames, Tron, Pink Floyd, Devo, Rush. A bookshelf stood just inside
the door, overflowing with science-fiction and fantasy paperbacks (all titles I’d
read, of course). A second bookshelf by the bed was crammed to capacity with
old computer magazines and Dungeons & Dragons rule books. Several long
boxes of comic books were stacked against the wall, each carefully labeled. And
there on the battered wooden desk in the corner was James Halliday’s first
computer.
Like many home computers of its era, it was housed in the same case as its
keyboard. TRS-80 COLOR COMPUTER 2, 16K RAM was printed on a label above the
keys. Cables snaked out of the back of the machine, leading to an audiocassette

recorder, a small color television, a dot-matrix printer, and a 300-baud modem. A
long list of telephone numbers for dial-up bulletin board systems was taped to
the desk beside the modem.
I sat down and located the power switch for the computer and the TV. I heard
a crackle of static, followed by a low hum, as the TV warmed up. A moment
later, the TRS-80’s green start-up screen appeared, and I saw these words:
EXTENDED COLOR BASIC 1.1
COPYRIGHT (c) 1982 BY TANDY
OK
Below this was a flashing cursor, cycling through every color of the spectrum.
I typed HELLO and hit the Enter key.
?SYNTAX ERROR appeared on the next line. “Hello” wasn’t a valid command in
BASIC, the only language the ancient computer understood.
I knew from my research that the cassette recorder functioned as the TRS-80’s
“tape drive.” It stored data as analog sound on magnetic audiotapes. When
Halliday had first started programming, the poor kid hadn’t even had access to a
floppy disk drive. He’d had to store his code on cassette tapes. A shoebox sat
beside the tape drive, filled with dozens of these cassettes. Most of them were
text adventure games: Raaka-tu, Bedlam, Pyramid, and Madness and the
Minotaur. There were also a few ROM cartridges, which fit into a slot on the
side of the computer. I dug around in the box until I found a cartridge with
DUNGEONS OF DAGGORATH printed in crooked yellow text on its worn red label.
The game’s artwork depicted a first-person view of a long dungeon corridor
blocked by a hulking blue giant with a large stone ax.
When a list of the games found in Halliday’s bedroom had first appeared
online, I’d made sure to download and master every single one of them, so I’d
already solved Dungeons of Daggorath, about two years earlier. It had taken
most of a weekend. The graphics were crude, but even so, the game was fun and
incredibly addictive.
I knew from reading the message boards that during the past five years,
several gunters had played and solved Dungeons of Daggorath right here on
Halliday’s TRS-80. Some had solved every single game in the shoebox, just to
see if anything would happen. And nothing had. But none of those gunters had
been in possession of the Copper Key.
My hands were trembling slightly as I powered off the TRS-80 and inserted
the Dungeons of Daggorath cartridge. When I turned the computer back on, the
screen flashed to black and a crude graphic of a wizard appeared, accompanied

by some ominous sound effects. The wizard held a staff in one hand, and below
him, printed in all capital letters, was the legend I DARE YE ENTER … THE
DUNGEONS OF DAGGORATH!

I laid my fingers on the keyboard and began to play. As soon as I did, a
jambox sitting on top of Halliday’s dresser turned itself on, and familiar music
began to blast out of it. It was Basil Poledouris’s score for Conan the Barbarian.
That must be Anorak’s way of letting me know I’m on the right track, I
thought.
I quickly lost track of time. I forgot that my avatar was sitting in Halliday’s
bedroom and that, in reality, I was sitting in my hideout, huddled near the
electric heater, tapping at the empty air in front of me, entering commands on an
imaginary keyboard. All of the intervening layers slipped away, and I lost myself
in the game within the game.
In Dungeons of Daggorath, you control your avatar by typing in commands,
like TURN LEFT or GET TORCH, navigating your way through a maze of vectorgraphic corridors while fighting off spiders, stone giants, blobs, and wraiths as
you descend deeper and deeper, working your way down through the dungeon’s
five increasingly difficult levels. It took a while for the commands and quirks of
the game to come back to me, but once they did, the game wasn’t that difficult to
solve. The ability to save my place at any time basically gave me infinite lives.
(Although saving and reloading games from the tape drive proved to be a slow
and tedious process. It often took several attempts and a lot of fiddling with the
cassette deck’s volume knob.) Saving my game also allowed me to log out for
bathroom breaks, and to recharge my space heater.
While I was playing, the Conan the Barbarian score ended and the jambox
clicked over and began to play the opposite side of the tape, treating me to the
synthesizer-laden score for Ladyhawke. I couldn’t wait to rub Aech’s nose in
that.
I reached the last level of the dungeon around four o’clock in the morning and
faced off against the Evil Wizard of Daggorath. After dying and reloading twice,
I finally defeated him, using an Elvish Sword and a Ring of Ice. I completed the
game by picking up the wizard’s magic ring, claiming it for myself. As I did, an
image appeared on the screen, showing a wizard with a bright star on his staff
and his robes. The text below read: BEHOLD! DESTINY AWAITS THE HAND OF A NEW
WIZARD!

I waited to see what would happen. For a moment, nothing did. Then
Halliday’s ancient dot-matrix printer came to life and noisily ground out a single
line of text. The tractor feed spooled the page out of the top of the printer. I tore
the sheet off and read what was there:

CONGRATULATIONS! YOU HAVE OPENED THE FIRST GATE!

I glanced around and saw that there was now a wrought-iron gate embedded
in the bedroom wall, in the exact spot where the WarGames poster had been a
second before. In the center of the gate was a copper-plated lock with a keyhole.
I climbed up on top of Halliday’s desk so I could reach the lock, then slid the
Copper Key into the keyhole and turned it. The entire gate began to glow, as if
the metal had become superheated, and its double doors swung inward, revealing
a field of stars. It appeared to be a portal into deep space.
“My God, it’s full of stars,” I heard a disembodied voice say. I recognized it as
a sound bite from the film 2010. Then I heard a low, ominous hum, followed by
a piece of music from that film’s score: “Also Sprach Zarathustra” by Richard
Strauss.
I leaned forward and looked through the portal. Left and right, up and down.
Nothing but an endless field of stars in all directions. Squinting, I could also
make out a few tiny nebulae and galaxies in the distance.
I didn’t hesitate. I jumped into the open gate. It seemed to pull me in, and I
began to fall. But I fell forward instead of down, and the stars seemed to fall
with me.

I found myself standing in an old video arcade, playing Galaga.
The game was already in progress. I had double ships and a score of 41,780
points. I glanced down and saw that my hands were on the controls. After a
second or two of disorientation, I reflexively began to play, moving the joystick
left just in time to avoid losing one of my ships.
Keeping one eye on the game, I tried to make sense of my surroundings. In
my peripheral vision I was able to make out a Dig Dug game on my left and a
Zaxxon machine to my right. Behind me, I could hear a cacophony of digital
combat coming from dozens of other vintage arcade games. Then, as I finished
clearing the wave on Galaga, I noticed my reflection in the game’s screen. It
wasn’t my avatar’s face I saw there. It was Matthew Broderick’s face. A young
pre–Ferris Bueller and pre-Ladyhawke Matthew Broderick.
Then I knew where I was. And who I was.
I was David Lightman, Matthew Broderick’s character in the movie
WarGames. And this was his first scene in the film.
I was in the movie.
I took a quick glance around and saw a detailed replica of 20 Grand Palace,
the combination arcade/pizza joint featured in the film. Kids with feathered ’80s
hairstyles were clustered around each of the games. Others sat in booths, eating
pizza and drinking sodas. “Video Fever” by the Beepers blasted out of a jukebox
in the corner. Everything looked and sounded exactly as it did in the movie.
Halliday had copied every last detail from the film and re-created it as an
interactive simulation.
Holy shit.
I’d spent years wondering what challenges awaited me inside the First Gate.
Never once had I imagined this. But I probably should have. WarGames had
been one of Halliday’s all-time favorite movies. Which was why I had watched it
over three dozen times. Well, that, and also because it was completely awesome,
with an old-school teenage computer hacker as the protagonist. And it looked

like all of that research was about to pay off.
Now I heard a repetitive electronic beeping. It seemed to be coming from the
right pocket of the jeans I was wearing. Keeping my left hand on the joystick, I
reached in my pocket and pulled out a digital watch. The readout said 7:45 a.m.
When I pushed one of the buttons to silence the alarm, a warning flashed in the
center of my display: DAVID, YOU’RE GOING TO BE LATE FOR SCHOOL!
I used a voice command to pull up my OASIS map, hoping to learn where the
gate had transported me. But it turned out that not only was I no longer on
Middletown, I was no longer in the OASIS at all. My locator icon was in the
middle of a blank screen, which meant I was OTM—off the map. When I’d
stepped into the gate, it had transported my avatar into a stand-alone simulation,
a virtual location separate from the OASIS. It seemed that the only way I could
get back would be to clear the gate by completing the quest. But if this was a
videogame, how was I supposed to play it? If this was a quest, what was my
goal? I continued to play Galaga while pondering these questions. A second
later, a young boy walked into the arcade and came over to me.
“Hi, David!” he said, his eyes on my game.
I recognized this kid from the movie. His name was Howie. In the film,
Matthew Broderick’s character hands his Galaga game off to Howie when he
rushes off to school.
“Hi, David!” the boy repeated, in the same exact tone. As he spoke this time,
his words also appeared as text, superimposed across the bottom of my display,
like subtitles. Below this, flashing red, were the words FINAL DIALOGUE WARNING!
I began to understand. The simulation was warning me that this was my final
chance to deliver the next line of dialogue from the movie. If I didn’t say the
line, I could guess what would probably happen next. GAME OVER.
But I didn’t panic, because I knew the next line. I’d seen WarGames so many
times that I knew the entire film by heart.
“Hi, Howie!” I said. But the voice I heard in my earphones was not my own.
It was Matthew Broderick’s voice. And as I spoke the line, the warning on my
display vanished and a score of 100 points appeared, superimposed at the top of
my display.
I racked my brain, trying to mentally replay the rest of the scene. The next line
came to me. “How’s it going?” I said, and my score jumped to 200 points.
“Pretty good,” Howie replied.
I started to feel giddy. This was incredible. I was totally inside the movie.
Halliday had transformed a fifty-year-old film into a real-time interactive
videogame. I wondered how long it had taken him to program this thing.
Another warning flashed on my display: YOU’RE GOING TO BE LATE FOR SCHOOL,

DAVID! HURRY!

I stepped away from the Galaga machine. “Hey, you wanna take this over?” I
asked Howie.
“Sure,” he replied, grabbing the controls. “Thanks!”
A green path appeared on the floor of the arcade, leading from where I stood
to the exit. I started to follow it, then remembered to run back and grab my
notebook off of the Dig Dug game, just like David had in the movie. As I did
this, my score jumped another 100 points, and ACTION BONUS! appeared on my
display.
“Bye, David!” Howie shouted.
“Bye!” I shouted back. Another 100 points. This was easy!
I followed the green path out of 20 Grand Palace and up the busy street a few
blocks. I was now running along a tree-lined suburban street. I rounded a corner
and saw that the path led directly to a large brick building. The sign over the
door said Snohomish High School—David’s school, and the setting of the next
few scenes in the movie.
My mind was racing as I ran inside. If all I had to do was rattle off lines of
dialogue from WarGames on cue for the next two hours, this was going to be a
breeze. Without even knowing it, I’d totally overprepared. I probably knew
WarGames even better than I knew Real Genius and Better Off Dead.
As I ran down the empty school hallway, another warning flashed in front of
me: YOU’RE LATE FOR YOUR BIOLOGY CLASS!
I continued to sprint at top speed, following the green path, which was now
pulsing brightly. It eventually led me to the door of a classroom on the second
floor. Through the window, I could see that class was already in session. The
teacher was up at the board. I saw my seat—the only empty one in the room.
It was right behind Ally Sheedy.
I opened the door and tiptoed inside, but the teacher spotted me right away.
“Ah, David! Nice of you to join us!”

Making it all the way to the end of the movie wound up being a lot harder than I
anticipated. It only took me about fifteen minutes to figure out the “rules” of the
game and to sort out how the scoring system worked. I was actually required to
do a lot more than simply recite dialogue. I also had to perform all the actions
that Broderick’s character performed in the film, in the correct way and at the
correct moment. It was like being forced to act the leading role in a play you’d
watched many times but had never actually rehearsed.
For most of the movie’s first hour, I was on edge, constantly trying to think

ahead to have my next line of dialogue ready. Whenever I flubbed a line or
didn’t perform an action at the right moment, my score decreased and a warning
flashed on my display. When I made two mistakes in a row, a FINAL WARNING
message appeared. I wasn’t sure what would happen if I got three strikes in a
row, but my guess was that I’d either be expelled from the gate or that my avatar
would simply be killed. I wasn’t eager to find out which it would be.
Whenever I correctly performed seven actions or recited seven lines of
dialogue in a row, the game would award me a “Cue Card Power-Up.” The next
time I blanked on what to do or say, I could select the Cue Card icon and the
correct action or line of dialogue would appear on my display, sort of like a
teleprompter.
During scenes that didn’t involve my character, the simulation cut to a passive
third-person perspective, and all I had to do was sit back and watch things play
out, sort of like watching a cut scene in an old videogame. During these scenes, I
could relax until my character came on-screen again. During one of these breaks,
I tried to access a copy of the movie from my OASIS console’s hard drive, with
the intention of playing it in a window on my display so I could refer to it. But
the system wouldn’t let me. In fact, I found that I couldn’t open any windows at
all while inside the gate. When I tried, I got a warning: NO CHEATING. TRY TO
CHEAT AGAIN AND IT’S GAME OVER!

Luckily, it turned out that I didn’t need any help. Once I’d collected the
maximum of five Cue Card Power-Ups I began to relax, and the game actually
started to be fun. It wasn’t hard to enjoy being inside one of my favorite flicks.
After a while, I even discovered that I could earn bonus points by delivering a
line in the exact tone and with the same inflection as in the film.
I didn’t know it at the time, but I’d just become the first person to play an
entirely new type of videogame. When GSS got wind of the WarGames
simulation inside the First Gate (and they did a short time later), the company
quickly patented the idea and began to buy up the rights to old movies and TV
shows and convert them into immersive interactive games that they dubbed
Flicksyncs. Flicksyncs became wildly popular. There turned out to be a huge
market for games that allowed people to play a leading role in one of their
favorite old movies or TV series.
By the time I reached the final scenes of the movie, I was starting to get
twitchy from exhaustion. I’d now been up for over twenty-four hours straight,
jacked in the entire time. The last action I had to perform was instructing the
WOPR supercomputer to “play itself” at tic-tac-toe. Since every game the
WOPR played ended in a tie, this had the improbable effect of teaching the
artificially intelligent computer that global thermonuclear war, too, was a game

in which “the only winning move is not to play.” This prevented the WOPR
from launching all of the United States’ ICBMs at the Soviet Union.
I, David Lightman, a teenage computer geek from suburban Seattle, had
single-handedly prevented the end of human civilization.
The NORAD command center erupted in celebration, and I waited for the
movie’s end credits to roll. But they didn’t. Instead, all the characters around me
vanished, leaving me alone in the giant war room. When I checked my avatar’s
reflection in a computer monitor, I saw that I no longer looked like Matthew
Broderick. I’d changed back into Parzival.
I glanced around the empty NORAD command center, wondering what I was
supposed to do next. Then all of the giant video display screens in front of me
went blank, and four lines of glowing green text appeared on them. It was
another riddle:
The captain conceals the Jade Key
in a dwelling long neglected
But you can only blow the whistle
once the trophies are all collected
I stood there for a second, staring at the words in stunned silence. Then I
snapped out of my daze and quickly took several screenshots of the text. As I
was doing this, the Copper Gate reappeared, embedded in a nearby wall. The
gate was open, and through it I could see Halliday’s bedroom. It was the exit.
The way out.
I’d done it. I’d cleared the First Gate.
I glanced back up at the riddle on the viewscreens. It had taken me years to
decipher the Limerick and locate the Copper Key. At first glance, this new riddle
about the Jade Key looked like it might take just as long to figure out. I didn’t
understand a word of it. But I was also dead on my feet, and in no condition for
further puzzle-solving. I could barely keep my eyes open.
I jumped through the exit and landed with a thud on the floor of Halliday’s
bedroom. When I turned around and looked at the wall, I saw that the gate was
now gone and the WarGames poster had reappeared in its place.
I checked my avatar’s stats and saw that I’d been awarded several hundred
thousand experience points for clearing the gate, enough to raise my avatar from
tenth level up to twentieth in one shot. Then I checked the Scoreboard:
HIGH SCORES:
1. Parzival

110000

2. Art3mis
3. JDH
4. JDH
5. JDH
6. JDH
7. JDH
8. JDH
9. JDH
10. JDH

9000
0000000
0000000
0000000
0000000
0000000
0000000
0000000
0000000

My score had increased by 100,000 points, and a copper-colored gate icon
now appeared beside it. The media (and everyone else) had probably been
monitoring the Scoreboard since last night, so now the whole world would know
that I’d cleared the First Gate.
I was too exhausted to consider the implications. All I could think about was
sleep.
I ran downstairs and into the kitchen. The keys to the Halliday family car were
on a pegboard next to the refrigerator. I grabbed them and rushed outside. The
car (the one that wasn’t up on blocks) was a 1982 Ford Thunderbird. The engine
started on the second try. I backed out of the driveway and drove to the bus
station.
From there, I teleported back to the transport terminal next to my school on
Ludus. Then I went to my locker and dumped all of my avatar’s newfound
treasure, armor, and weapons inside before finally logging out of the OASIS.
When I pulled off my visor, it was 6:17 a.m. I rubbed my bloodshot eyes and
gazed around the dark interior of my hideout, trying to wrap my head around
everything that had just happened.
I suddenly realized how cold it was in the van. I’d been using the tiny space
heater off and on all night and had drained the batteries. I was way too tired to
get on the exercise bike and recharge them. And I didn’t have the energy to make
the trek back to my aunt’s trailer, either. But the sun would be up soon, so I knew
I could crash there in my hideout without worrying that I would freeze to death.
I slid off of my chair and onto the floor, then curled up in my sleeping bag. As
I closed my eyes, I began to ponder the riddle of the Jade Key. But sleep
swallowed me whole a few seconds later.
I had a dream. I was standing alone in the center of a scorched battlefield,
with several different armies arrayed against me. An army of Sixers stood in

front of me, and several different gunter clans surrounded me on all other flanks,
brandishing swords and guns and weapons of powerful magic.
I looked down at my body. It wasn’t Parzival’s body; it was my own. And I
was wearing armor made of paper. In my right hand was a toy plastic sword, and
in my left was a large glass egg. It looked exactly like the glass egg that causes
Tom Cruise’s character so much grief in Risky Business, but somehow I knew
that, in the context of my dream, it was supposed to be Halliday’s Easter egg.
And I was standing there, out in the open, holding it for all the world to see.
In unison, the armies of my enemies let out a fierce battle cry and charged
toward me. They converged on my position with bared teeth and blood in their
eyes. They were coming to take the egg, and there was nothing I could do to stop
them.
I knew I was dreaming, and so I expected to wake up before they reached me.
But I didn’t. The dream continued as the egg was ripped from my grasp, and I
felt myself being torn to shreds.

I slept for over twelve hours and missed school entirely.
When I finally woke up, I rubbed my eyes and lay there in silence awhile,
trying to convince myself that the events of the previous day had actually
occurred. It all seemed like a dream to me now. Far too good to be real.
Eventually, I grabbed my visor and got online to find out for sure.
Every single newsfeed seemed to be showing a screenshot of the Scoreboard.
And my avatar’s name was there at the top, in first place. Art3mis was still in
second place, but the score beside her name had now increased to 109,000, just
1,000 points less than mine. And, like me, she had a copper-colored gate icon
beside her score now too.
So she’d done it. While I’d slept, she’d deciphered the inscription on the
Copper Key. Then she’d gone to Middletown, located the gate, and made it all
the way through WarGames, just a few hours after I had.
I no longer felt quite so impressed with myself.
I flipped past a few more channels before stopping on one of the major
newsfeed networks, where I saw two men sitting in front of a screenshot of the
Scoreboard. The man on the left, some middle-aged intellectual type billed as
“Edgar Nash, Gunter Expert” appeared to be explaining the scores to the
newsfeed anchor beside him.
“—appears that the avatar named Parzival received slightly more points for
being the first to find the Copper Key,” Nash said, pointing to the Scoreboard.
“Then, early this morning, Parzival’s score increased another one hundred
thousand points, and a Copper Gate icon appeared beside his score. The same
change occurred to Art3mis’s score a few hours later. This seems to indicate that
both of them have now completed the first of the three gates.”
“The famous Three Gates that James Halliday spoke of in the Anorak’s
Invitation video?” the anchor said.
“The very same.”
“But Mr. Nash. After five years, how is it that two avatars accomplished this

feat on the same day, within just a few hours of each other?”
“Well, I think there’s only one plausible answer. These two people, Parzival
and Art3mis, must be working together. They’re probably both members of what
is known as a ‘gunter clan.’ These are groups of egg hunters who—”
I frowned and changed the channel, surfing the feeds until I saw an overly
enthusiastic reporter interviewing Ogden Morrow via satellite. The Ogden
Morrow.
“—joining us live from his home in Oregon. Thanks for being with us today,
Mr. Morrow!”
“No problem,” Morrow replied. It had been almost six years since Morrow
had last spoken to the media, but he didn’t seem to have aged a day. His wild
gray hair and long beard made him look like a cross between Albert Einstein and
Santa Claus. That comparison was also a pretty good description of his
personality.
The reporter cleared his throat, obviously a bit nervous. “Let me start off by
asking what your reaction is to the events of the last twenty-four hours. Were
you surprised to see those names appear on Halliday’s Scoreboard?”
“Surprised? Yes, a little, I suppose. But ‘excited’ is probably a better word.
Like everyone else, I’ve been watching and waiting for this to happen. Of
course, I wasn’t sure if I’d still be alive when it finally did! I’m glad that I am.
It’s all very exciting, isn’t it?”
“Do you think these two gunters, Parzival and Art3mis, are working
together?”
“I have no idea. I suppose it’s possible.”
“As you know, Gregarious Simulation Systems keeps all OASIS user records
confidential, so we have no way of knowing their true identities. Do you think
either of them will come forward and reveal themselves to the public?”
“Not if they’re smart, they won’t,” Morrow said, adjusting his wire-rimmed
spectacles. “If I were in their shoes, I’d do everything possible to remain
anonymous.”
“Why do you say that?”
“Because once the world discovers who they really are, they’ll never have a
moment’s peace afterward. If people think you can help them find Halliday’s
egg, they’ll never leave you alone. Trust me, I know from experience.”
“Yes, I suppose you do.” The reporter flashed a fake smile. “However, this
network has contacted both Parzival and Art3mis via e-mail, and we’ve extended
generous monetary offers to each of them in return for an exclusive interview,
either in the OASIS or here in the real world.”
“I’m sure they’re receiving many such offers. But I doubt they’ll accept,”

Morrow said. Then he looked straight into the camera, and I felt as if he was
now speaking directly to me. “Anyone smart enough to accomplish what they
have should know better than to risk everything by talking to the vultures in the
media.”
The reporter chuckled uncomfortably. “Ah, Mr. Morrow … I really don’t
think that’s called for.”
Morrow shrugged. “Too bad. I do.”
The reporter cleared his throat again. “Well, moving on … Do you have any
predictions about what changes we might see on the Scoreboard in the weeks to
come?”
“I’m betting that those other eight empty slots will fill up pretty quickly.”
“What makes you think so?”
“One person can keep a secret, but not two,” he replied, staring directly into
the camera again. “I don’t know. Maybe I’m wrong. But I am sure of one thing.
The Sixers are going to use every dirty trick at their disposal to learn the location
of the Copper Key and the First Gate.”
“You’re referring to the employees of Innovative Online Industries?”
“Yes. IOI. The Sixers. Their sole purpose is to exploit loopholes in the contest
rules and subvert the intention of Jim’s will. The very soul of the OASIS is at
stake here. The last thing Jim would have wanted is for his creation to fall into
the hands of a fascist multinational conglomerate like IOI.”
“Mr. Morrow, IOI owns this network.…”
“Of course they do!” Morrow shouted gleefully. “They own practically
everything! Including you, pretty boy! I mean, did they tattoo a UPC code on
your ass when they hired you to sit there and spout their corporate propaganda?”
The reporter began to stutter, glancing nervously at something off camera.
“Quick!” Morrow said. “You better cut me off before I say anything else!” He
broke up into gales of laughter just as the network cut his satellite feed.
The reporter took a few seconds to regroup, then said, “Thank you again for
joining us today, Mr. Morrow. Unfortunately that’s all the time we have to speak
with him. Now let’s go back to Judy, who is standing by with a panel of
renowned Halliday scholars—”
I smiled and closed the vidfeed window, pondering the old man’s advice. I’d
always suspected that Morrow knew more about the contest than he was letting
on.

Morrow and Halliday had grown up together, founded a company together, and
changed the world together. But Morrow had led a very different life from

Halliday’s—one involving a much greater connection to humanity. And a great
deal more tragedy.
During the mid-’90s, back when Gregarious Simulation Systems was still just
Gregarious Games, Morrow had moved in with his high-school sweetheart, Kira
Underwood. Kira was born and raised in London. (Her birth name was Karen,
but she’d insisted on being called Kira ever since her first viewing of The Dark
Crystal.) Morrow met her when she spent her junior year as an exchange student
at his high school. In his autobiography, Morrow wrote that she was the
“quintessential geek girl,” unabashedly obsessed with Monty Python, comic
books, fantasy novels, and videogames. She and Morrow shared a few classes at
school, and he was smitten with her almost immediately. He invited her to attend
his weekly Dungeons & Dragons gaming sessions (just as he’d done with
Halliday a few years earlier), and to his surprise, she accepted. “She became the
lone female in our weekly gaming group,” Morrow wrote. “And every single one
of the guys developed a massive crush on her, including Jim. She was actually
the one who gave him the nickname ‘Anorak,’ a British slang term for an
obsessive geek. I think Jim adopted it as the name of his D and D character to
impress her. Or maybe it was his way of trying to let her know he was in on the
joke. The opposite sex made Jim extremely nervous, and Kira was the only girl I
ever saw him speak to in a relaxed manner. But even then, it was only in
character, as Anorak, during the course of our gaming sessions. And he would
only address her as Leucosia, the name of her D and D character.”
Ogden and Kira began dating. By the end of the school year, when it was time
for her to return home to London, the two of them had openly declared their love
for each other. They kept in touch during their remaining year of school by emailing every day, using an early pre-Internet computer bulletin board network
called FidoNet. When they both graduated from high school, Kira returned to the
States, moved in with Morrow, and became one of Gregarious Games’ first
employees. (For the first two years, she was their entire art department.) They
got engaged a few years after the launch of the OASIS. They were married a
year later, at which time Kira resigned from her position as an artistic director at
GSS. (She was a millionaire now too, thanks to her company stock options.)
Morrow stayed on at GSS for five more years. Then, in the summer of 2022, he
announced he was leaving the company. At the time, he claimed it was for
“personal reasons.” But years later, Morrow wrote in his autobiography that he’d
left GSS because “we were no longer in the videogame business,” and because
he felt that the OASIS had evolved into something horrible. “It had become a
self-imposed prison for humanity,” he wrote. “A pleasant place for the world to
hide from its problems while human civilization slowly collapses, primarily due

to neglect.”
Rumors also surfaced that Morrow had chosen to leave because he’d had a
huge falling-out with Halliday. Neither of them would confirm or deny these
rumors, and no one seemed to know what sort of dispute had ended their long
friendship. But sources within the company said that at the time of Morrow’s
resignation, he and Halliday had not spoken to each other directly in several
years. Even so, when Morrow left GSS, he sold his entire share of the company
directly to Halliday, for an undisclosed sum.
Ogden and Kira “retired” to their home in Oregon and started a nonprofit
educational software company, Halcydonia Interactive, which created free
interactive adventure games for kids. I’d grown up playing these games, all of
which were set in the magical kingdom of Halcydonia. Morrow’s games had
transported me out of my grim surroundings as a lonely kid growing up in the
stacks. They’d also taught me how to do math and solve puzzles while building
my self-esteem. In a way, the Morrows were among my very first teachers.
For the next decade, Ogden and Kira enjoyed a peaceful, happy existence,
living and working in relative seclusion. They tried to have children, but it
wasn’t in the cards for them. They’d begun to consider adoption when, in the
winter of 2034, Kira was killed in a car accident on an icy mountain road just a
few miles from their home.
After that, Ogden continued to run Halcydonia Interactive on his own. He
managed to stay out of the limelight until the morning of Halliday’s death, when
his home was besieged by the media. As Halliday’s former closest friend,
everyone assumed he alone could explain why the deceased billionaire had put
his entire fortune up for grabs. Morrow eventually held a press conference just to
get everyone off his back. It was the last time he’d spoken to the media, until
today. I’d watched the video of that press conference many, many times.
Morrow had begun it by reading a brief statement, saying that he hadn’t seen
or spoken to Halliday in over a decade. “We had a falling-out,” he said, “and that
is something I refuse to discuss, now or in the future. Suffice it to say, I have not
communicated with James Halliday in over ten years.”
“Then why did Halliday leave you his vast collection of classic coin-operated
videogames?” a reporter asked. “All of his other material possessions are to be
auctioned off. If you were no longer friends, why are you the only person he left
anything to?”
“I have no idea,” Morrow said simply.
Another reporter asked Morrow if he planned on looking for Halliday’s Easter
egg himself, since he’d known Halliday so well and would therefore probably
have a better chance than anyone of finding it. Morrow reminded the reporter

that the contest rules laid out in Halliday’s will stated that no one who had ever
worked for Gregarious Simulation Systems, or anyone in their immediate
families, was eligible to take part in the contest.
“Did you have any idea what Halliday was working on all those years he was
in seclusion?” another reporter asked.
“No. I suspected he might be working on some new game. Jim was always
working on a new game. For him, making games was as necessary as breathing.
But I never imagined he was planning something … of this magnitude.”
“As the person who knew James Halliday the best, do you have any advice for
the millions of people who are now searching for his Easter egg? Where do you
think people should start looking for it?”
“I think Jim made that pretty obvious,” Morrow replied, tapping a finger
against his temple, just as Halliday had in the Anorak’s Invitation video. “Jim
always wanted everyone to share his obsessions, to love the same things he
loved. I think this contest is his way of giving the entire world an incentive to do
just that.”

I closed my file on Morrow and checked my e-mail. The system informed me
that I’d received over two million new unsolicited messages. These were
automatically filed in a separate folder, so I could sort through them later. Only
two new messages were left in my inbox, from people on my authorized contact
list. One was from Aech. The other was from Art3mis.
I opened Aech’s message first. It was vidmail, and his avatar’s face appeared
in a window. “Holy shit!” he shouted. “I don’t believe this! Now you’ve cleared
the motherfucking First Gate and you still haven’t phoned me? Call my ass!
Now! The second you get this!”
I considered waiting a few days to call Aech back but quickly abandoned that
idea. I needed to talk to someone about all this, and Aech was my best friend. If
there was anyone I could trust, it was him.
He picked up on the first ring, and his avatar appeared in a new window in
front of me. “You dog!” he shouted. “You brilliant, sly, devious dog!”
“Hey, Aech,” I said, trying to deadpan it. “What’s new?”
“What’s new? What’s new? You mean, other than, you know, seeing my best
friend’s name appear at the top of the Scoreboard? Other than that, you mean?”
He leaned forward so that his mouth completely filled the vidfeed window and
shouted, “Other than that, not much! Not much new at all!”
I laughed. “Sorry it took me a while to call you. I had kind of a late night.”
“No shit, you had a late night!” he said. “Look at you! How can you be so

calm! Don’t you realize what this means? This is huge! This is beyond epic! I
mean … congratu-freakin’-lations, man!” He began to bow repeatedly. “I am not
worthy!”
“Cut it out, OK? It’s really not a big deal. I haven’t actually won anything yet.
…”
“Not a big deal!” he cried. “Not. A. Big. Deal? Are you kidding me? You’re a
legend now, man! You just became the first gunter in history to find the Copper
Key! And clear the First Gate! You are a god, from this moment forth! Do you
not realize this, fool?”
“Seriously. Stop it. I’m already freaked out enough as it is.”
“Have you seen the news? The whole world is freaking out! And the gunter
boards are going apeshit! And everyone is talking about you, amigo.”
“I know. Listen, I hope you’re not pissed at me for keeping you in the dark. I
felt really weird about not returning your calls or telling you what I was up to.
…”
“Oh, come on!” He rolled his eyes dismissively. “You know damn well that if
I’d been in your shoes, I would have done the same thing. That’s how the game
is played. But”—his tone grew more serious—“I am curious to know how that
Art3mis chick happened to find the Copper Key and clear the gate right after you
did. Everyone seems to think you two were working together, but I know that’s
horseshit. So what happened? Was she following you or something?”
I shook my head. “No, she found the key’s hiding place before I did. Last
month, she said. She just wasn’t able to obtain the key until now.” I was silent
for a second. “I can’t really go into the details without, you know—”
Aech held up both hands. “No worries. I totally understand. I wouldn’t want
for you to accidentally drop any hints.” He flashed his trademark Cheshire grin,
and his gleaming white teeth seemed to take up half of the vidfeed window.
“Actually, I should let you know where I am right now.…”
He adjusted his vidfeed’s virtual camera so that it pulled back from a tight
shot of his face to a much wider shot that revealed where he was—standing next
to the flat-topped hill, just outside the entrance to the Tomb of Horrors.
My jaw dropped. “How in the hell—?”
“Well, when I saw your name all over the newsfeeds last night, it occurred to
me that for as long as I’ve known you, you’ve never had the dough to do much
traveling. Any traveling, really. So I figured that if you’d found the hiding place
of the Copper Key, it probably had to be somewhere close to Ludus. Or maybe
even on Ludus.”
“Well done,” I said, and I meant it.
“Not really. I spent hours racking my pea-sized brain before I finally thought

to search the map of Ludus for the surface features described in the Tomb of
Horrors module. But once I did, everything else clicked into place. And here I
am.”
“Congratulations.”
“Yeah, well, it was pretty easy once you pointed me in the right direction.” He
glanced back over his shoulder at the tomb. “I’ve been searching for this place
for years, and all this time it was within walking distance of my school! I feel
like a total moron for not figuring it out on my own.”
“You’re not a moron,” I said. “You deciphered the Limerick on your own,
otherwise you wouldn’t even know about the Tomb of Horrors module, right?”
“So, you’re not pissed?” he said. “That I took advantage of my inside info?”
I shook my head. “No way. I would have done the same thing.”
“Well, regardless, I owe you one. And I won’t forget it.”
I nodded toward the tomb behind him. “Have you been inside yet?”
“Yeah. I came back up here to call you, while I wait for the server to reset at
midnight. The tomb is empty right now, because your friend, Art3mis, already
blew through here earlier today.”
“We’re not friends,” I said. “She just showed up, a few minutes after I got the
key.”
“Did you guys throw down?”
“No. The tomb is a no-PvP zone.” I glanced at the time. “Looks like you’ve
still got a few hours to kill before the reset.”
“Yeah. I’ve been studying the original D and D module, trying to prepare
myself,” he said. “Wanna give me any tips?”
I grinned. “No. Not really.”
“Didn’t think so.” He was silent for a few seconds. “Listen, I have to ask you
something,” he said. “Does anyone at your school know your avatar’s name?”
“No. I’ve been careful to keep it a secret. No one there knows me as Parzival.
Not even the teachers.”
“Good,” he said. “I took the same precaution. Unfortunately, several of the
gunters who frequent the Basement know that we both attend school on Ludus,
so they might be able to connect the dots. I’m worried about one in particular.
…”
I felt a rush of panic. “I-r0k?”
Aech nodded. “He’s been calling me nonstop since your name appeared on the
Scoreboard, asking what I know. I played dumb, and he seemed to buy it. But if
my name shows up on the Scoreboard too, you can bet he’ll start bragging that
he knows us. And when he starts telling other gunters that you and I are both
students on Ludus—”

“Shit!” I cursed. “Then every gunter in the sim will be headed here to search
for the Copper Key.”
“Right,” Aech said. “And before long, the location of the tomb will be
common knowledge.”
I sighed. “Well, then you better get the key before that happens.”
“I’ll do my best.” He held up a copy of the Tomb of Horrors module. “Now, if
you’ll excuse me, I’m going to reread this thing for the hundredth time today.”
“Good luck, Aech,” I said. “Give me a call once you’ve cleared the gate.”
“If I clear the gate …”
“You will,” I said. “And when you do, we should meet in the Basement to
talk.”
“You got it, amigo.”
He waved good-bye and was about to end the call when I spoke up. “Hey,
Aech?”
“Yeah?”
“You might want to brush up on your jousting skills,” I said. “You know,
between now and midnight.”
He looked puzzled for a moment; then a smile of understanding spread across
his face. “I got ya,” he said. “Thanks, pal.”
“Good luck.”
As his vidfeed window winked out, I found myself wondering how Aech and I
would remain friends through everything that lay ahead. Neither of us wanted to
work as a team, so from here on out we would be in direct competition with each
other. Would I eventually regret helping him today? Or come to resent that I’d
unwittingly led him to the Copper Key’s hiding place?
I pushed these thoughts aside and opened the e-mail from Art3mis. It was an
old-fashioned text message.
Dear Parzival,
Congrats! See? You’re famous now, just like I said. Although it looks
like we’ve both been thrust into the limelight. Kinda scary, eh?
Thanks for the tip about playing on the left side. You were right.
Somehow, that did the trick. But don’t go thinking I owe you any favors,
mister. :-)
The First Gate was pretty wild, wasn’t it? Not at all what I expected. It
would have been cool if Halliday had given me the option to play Ally

Sheedy instead, but what can you do?
This new riddle is a real head-scratcher, isn’t it? I hope it doesn’t take us
another five years to decipher it.
Anyhow, I just wanted to say that it was an honor to meet you. I hope
our paths cross again soon.
Sincerely,
Art3mis
ps—Enjoy being #1 while you can, pal. It won’t last for long.
I reread her message several times, grinning like a dopey schoolboy. Then I
typed out my reply:
Dear Art3mis,
Congratulations to you, too. You weren’t kidding. Competition clearly
brings out the best in you.
You’re welcome for the tip about playing on the left. You totally owe
me a favor now. ;-)
The new riddle is a cinch. I think I’ve already got it figured out,
actually. What’s the hold-up on your end?
It was an honor to meet you, too. If you ever feel like hanging out in a
chat room, let me know.
MTFBWYA,
Parzival
ps—Are you challenging me? Bring the pain, woman.
After rewriting it a few dozen times, I tapped the Send button. Then I pulled
up my screenshot of the Jade Key riddle and began to study it, syllable by
syllable. But I couldn’t seem to concentrate. No matter how hard I tried to focus,
my mind kept drifting back to Art3mis.

Aech cleared the First Gate early the next day.
His name appeared on the Scoreboard in third place, with a score of 108,000
points. The value of obtaining the Copper Key had dropped another 1,000 points
for him, but the value of clearing the First Gate remained unchanged at 100,000.
I returned to school that same morning. I’d considered calling in sick, but was
concerned that my absence might raise suspicions. When I got there, I realized I
shouldn’t have worried. Due to the sudden renewed interest in the Hunt, over
half of the student body, and quite a few of the teachers, didn’t bother showing
up. Since everyone at school knew my avatar by the name Wade3, no one paid
any attention to me. Roaming the halls unnoticed, I decided that I enjoyed
having a secret identity. It made me feel like Clark Kent or Peter Parker. I
thought my dad would probably have gotten a kick out of that.
That afternoon, I-r0k sent e-mails to Aech and me, attempting to blackmail us.
He said that if we didn’t tell him how to find the Copper Key and the First Gate,
he would post what he knew about us to every gunter message board he could
find. When we refused, he made good on his threat and began telling anyone
who would listen that Aech and I were both students on Ludus. Of course, he
had no way of proving he really knew us, and by that time there were hundreds
of other gunters claiming to be our close personal friends, so Aech and I were
hoping his posts would go unnoticed. But they didn’t, of course. At least two
other gunters were sharp enough to connect the dots between Ludus, the
Limerick, and the Tomb of Horrors. The day after I-r0k let the cat out of the bag,
the name “Daito” appeared in the fourth slot on the Scoreboard. Then, less than
fifteen minutes later, the name “Shoto” appeared in the fifth slot. Somehow,
they’d both obtained a copy of the Copper Key on the same day, without waiting
for the server to reset at midnight. Then, a few hours later, both Daito and Shoto
cleared the First Gate.
No one had ever heard of these avatars before, but their names seemed to
indicate they were working together, either as a duo or as part of a clan. Shoto

and daito were the Japanese names for the short and long swords worn by
samurai. When worn as a set, the two swords were called daisho, and this
quickly became the nickname by which the two of them were known.
Only four days had passed since my name had first appeared on the
Scoreboard, and one new name had appeared below mine on each subsequent
day. The secret was out now, and the hunt seemed to be shifting into high gear.
All week, I was unable to focus on anything my teachers were saying.
Luckily, I only had two months of school left, and I’d already earned enough
credits to graduate, even if I coasted from here on out. So I drifted from one
class to the next in a daze, puzzling over the Jade Key riddle, reciting it again
and again in my mind.
The captain conceals the Jade Key
in a dwelling long neglected
But you can only blow the whistle
once the trophies are all collected
According to my English Lit textbook, a poem with four lines of text and an
alternate-line rhyme scheme was known as a quatrain, so that became my
nickname for the riddle. Each night after school, I logged out of the OASIS and
filled the blank pages of my grail diary with possible interpretations of the
Quatrain.
What “captain” was Anorak talking about? Captain Kangaroo? Captain
America? Captain Buck Rogers in the twenty-fifth century?
And where in the hell was this “dwelling long neglected”? That part of the
clue seemed maddeningly nonspecific. Halliday’s boyhood home on Middletown
couldn’t really be classified as “neglected,” but maybe he was talking about a
different house in his hometown? That seemed too easy, and too close to the
hiding place of the Copper Key.
At first, I thought the neglected dwelling might be a reference to Revenge of
the Nerds, one of Halliday’s favorite films. In that movie, the nerds of the title
rent a dilapidated house and fix it up (during a classic ’80s music montage). I
visited a re-creation of the Revenge of the Nerds house on the planet Skolnick
and spent a day searching it, but it proved to be a dead end.
The last two lines of the Quatrain were also a complete mystery. They seemed
to say that once you found the neglected dwelling, you would have to collect a
bunch of “trophies” and then blow some kind of whistle. Or did that line mean
blow the whistle in the colloquial sense, as in “to reveal a secret or alert someone
to a crime”? Either way, it didn’t make any sense to me. But I continued to go

over each line, word by word, until my brain began to feel like Aquafresh
toothpaste.

That Friday after school, the day Daito and Shoto cleared the First Gate, I was
sitting in a secluded spot a few miles from my school, a steep hill with a solitary
tree at the top. I liked to come here to read, to do my homework, or to simply
enjoy the view of the surrounding green fields. I didn’t have access to that kind
of view in the real world.
As I sat under the tree, I sorted through the millions of messages still clogging
my inbox. I’d been sifting through them all week. I’d received notes from people
all over the globe. Letters of congratulation. Pleas for help. Death threats.
Interview requests. Several long, incoherent diatribes from gunters whose quest
for the egg had clearly driven them insane. I’d also received invitations to join
four of the biggest gunter clans: the Oviraptors, Clan Destiny, the Key Masters,
and Team Banzai. I told each of them thanks, but no thanks.
When I got tired of reading my “fan mail,” I sorted out all the messages that
were tagged as “business related” and began reading through those. I discovered
that I’d received several offers from movie studios and book publishers, all
interested in buying the rights to my life story. I deleted them all, because I’d
decided never to reveal my true identity to the world. At least, not until after I
found the egg.
I’d also received several endorsement-deal offers from companies who wanted
to use Parzival’s name and face to sell their services and products. An electronics
retailer was interested in using my avatar to promote their line of OASIS
immersion hardware so they could sell “Parzival-approved” haptic rigs, gloves,
and visors. I also had offers from a pizza-delivery chain, a shoe manufacturer,
and an online store that sold custom avatar skins. There was even a toy company
that wanted to manufacture a line of Parzival lunch boxes and action figures.
These companies were offering to pay me in OASIS credits, which would be
transferred directly to my avatar’s account.
I couldn’t believe my luck.
I replied to every single one of the endorsement inquires, saying that I would
accept their offers under the following conditions: I wouldn’t have to reveal my
true identity, and I would only do business through my OASIS avatar.
I started receiving replies within the hour, with contracts attached. I couldn’t
afford to have a lawyer look them over, but they all expired within a year’s time,
so I just went ahead and signed them electronically and e-mailed them back
along with a three-dimensional model of my avatar, to be used for the

commercials. I also received requests for an audio clip of my avatar’s voice, so I
sent them a synthesized clip of a deep baritone that made me sound like one of
those guys who did voice-overs for movie trailers.
Once they received everything, my avatar’s new sponsors informed me that
they’d wire my first round of payments to my OASIS account within the next
forty-eight hours. The amount of money I was going to receive wouldn’t be
enough to make me rich. Not by a long shot. But to a kid who’d grown up with
nothing, it seemed like a fortune.
I did some quick calculations. If I lived frugally, I would have enough to move
out of the stacks and rent a small efficiency apartment somewhere. For a year, at
least. The very thought filled me with nervous excitement. I’d dreamed of
escaping the stacks for as long as I could remember, and now it appeared that
dream was about to come true.
With the endorsement deals taken care of, I continued to sort through my email messages. When I sorted the remaining messages by sender, I discovered
that I’d received over five thousand e-mails from Innovative Online Industries.
Actually, they’d sent me five thousand copies of the same e-mail. They’d been
resending the same message all week, since my name first appeared on the
Scoreboard. And they were still resending it, once every minute.
The Sixers were mail-bombing me, to make sure they got my attention.
The e-mails were all marked Maximum Priority, with the subject line URGENT
BUSINESS PROPOSITION—PLEASE READ IMMEDIATELY!

The second I opened one, a delivery confirmation was sent back to IOI, letting
them know that I was finally reading their message. After that, they stopped
resending it.
Dear Parzival,
First, allow me to congratulate you on your recent accomplishments,
which we at Innovative Online Industries hold in the highest regard.
On behalf of IOI, I wish to make you a highly lucrative business
proposition, the exact details of which we can discuss in a private chatlink
session. Please use the attached contact card to reach me at your earliest
convenience, regardless of the day or hour.
Given our reputation within the gunter community, I would understand
if you were hesitant to speak with me. However, please be aware that if you
choose not to accept our proposal, we intend to approach each of your

competitors. At the very least, we hope you’ll do us the honor of being the
first to hear our generous offer. What have you got to lose?
Thank you for your kind attention. I look forward to speaking with you.
Sincerely,
Nolan Sorrento
Head of Operations
Innovative Online Industries
Despite the message’s reasonable tone, the threat behind it was crystal clear.
The Sixers wanted to recruit me. Or they wanted to pay me to tell them how to
find the Copper Key and clear the First Gate. And if I refused, they would go
after Art3mis, then Aech, Daito, Shoto, and every other gunter who managed to
get their name up on the Scoreboard. These shameless corporate sleazebags
wouldn’t stop until they found someone dumb enough or desperate enough to
give in and sell them the information they needed.
My first impulse was to delete every single copy of the e-mail and pretend I’d
never received it, but I changed my mind. I wanted to know exactly what IOI
was going to offer. And I couldn’t pass up the chance to meet Nolan Sorrento,
the Sixers’ infamous leader. There was no danger meeting with him via chatlink,
as long as I was careful about what I said.
I considered teleporting to Incipio before my “interview,” to buy a new skin
for my avatar. Maybe a tailored suit. Something flashy and expensive. But then I
thought better of it. I had nothing to prove to that corporate asshat. After all, I
was famous now. I would roll into the meeting wearing my default skin and a
fuck-off attitude. I would listen to their offer, then tell them to kiss my simulated
ass. Maybe I’d record the whole thing and post it on YouTube.
I prepped for the meeting by pulling up a search engine and learning
everything I could about Nolan Sorrento. He had a PhD in Computer Science.
Prior to becoming head of operations at IOI, he’d been a high-profile game
designer, overseeing the creation of several third-party RPGs that ran inside the
OASIS. I’d played all of his games, and they were actually pretty good. He’d
been a decent coder, back before he sold his soul. It was obvious why IOI had
hired him to lead their lackeys. They figured a game designer would have the
best chance of solving Halliday’s grand videogame puzzle. But Sorrento and the
Sixers had been at it for over five years and still had nothing to show for their
efforts. And now that gunter avatar names were appearing on the Scoreboard left

and right, the IOI brass had to be freaking out. Sorrento was probably catching
all kinds of heat from his superiors. I wondered if it had been Sorrento’s idea to
try to recruit me, or if he’d been ordered to do it.
Once I’d done my homework on Sorrento, I felt like I was ready to sit down
with the devil. I pulled up the contact card attached to Sorrento’s e-mail and
tapped the chatlink invitation icon at the bottom.

As I finished connecting to the chatlink session, my avatar materialized on a
grand observation deck with a stunning view of over a dozen OASIS worlds
suspended in black space beyond the curved window. I appeared to be on a space
station or a very large transport ship; I couldn’t tell which.
Chatlink sessions worked differently from chat rooms, and they were a lot
more expensive to host. When you opened a chatlink, an insubstantial copy of
your avatar was projected into another OASIS location. Your avatar wasn’t
actually there, and so it appeared to other avatars as a slightly transparent
apparition. But you could still interact with the environment in a limited way—
walking through doors, sitting in chairs, and so forth. Chatlinks were primarily
used for business purposes, when a company wanted to host a meeting in a
specific OASIS location without spending the time and money to transport
everyone’s avatars to it. This was the first time I’d ever used one.
I turned around and saw that my avatar was standing in front of a large Cshaped reception desk. The IOI corporate logo—giant, overlapping chrome
letters twenty feet tall—floated above it. As I approached the desk, an
impossibly beautiful blonde receptionist stood to greet me. “Mr. Parzival,” she
said, bowing slightly. “Welcome to Innovative Online Industries! Just a moment.
Mr. Sorrento is already on his way to greet you.”
I wasn’t sure how that could be, since I hadn’t warned them I was coming.
While I waited, I tried to activate my avatar’s vidfeed recorder, but IOI had
disabled recording in this chatlink session. They obviously didn’t want me to
have video evidence of what was about to go down. So much for my plan to post
the interview on YouTube.
Less than a minute later, another avatar appeared, through a set of automatic
doors on the opposite side of the observation deck. He headed right for me, boots
clicking on the polished floor. It was Sorrento. I recognized him because he
wasn’t using a standard-issue Sixer avatar—one of the perks of his position. His
avatar’s face matched the photos of him I’d seen online. Blond hair and brown

eyes, a hawkish nose. He did wear the standard Sixer uniform—a navy blue
bodysuit with gold epaulettes at the shoulders and a silver IOI logo on his right
breast, with his employee number printed beneath it: 655321.
“At last!” he said as he walked up, grinning like a jackal. “The famous
Parzival has graced us with his presence!” He extended a gloved right hand.
“Nolan Sorrento, chief of operations. It’s an honor to meet you.”
“Yeah,” I said, doing my best to sound aloof. “Likewise, I guess.” Even as a
chatlink projection, my avatar could still mime shaking his outstretched hand.
Instead I just stared down at it as if he were offering me a dead rat. He dropped it
after a few seconds, but his smile didn’t falter. It broadened.
“Please follow me.” He led me across the deck and back through the
automatic doors, which slid open to reveal a large launching bay. It contained a
single interplanetary shuttlecraft emblazoned with the IOI logo. Sorrento began
to board it, but I halted at the foot of the ramp.
“Why bother bringing me here via a chatlink?” I asked, motioning to the bay
around us. “Why not just give me your sales pitch in a chat room?”
“Please, indulge me,” he said. “This chatlink is part of our sales pitch. We
want to give you the same experience you’d have if you came to visit our
headquarters in person.”
Right, I thought. If I had come here in person, my avatar would be surrounded
by thousands of Sixers and I’d be at your mercy.
I joined him inside the shuttle. The ramp retracted and we launched out of the
bay. Through the ship’s wraparound windows I saw that we were leaving one of
the Sixers’ orbital space stations. Looming directly ahead of us was the planet
IOI-1, a massive chrome globe. It reminded me of the killer floating spheres in
the Phantasm films. Gunters referred to IOI-1 as “the Sixer homeworld.” The
company had constructed it shortly after the contest began, to serve as IOI’s
online base of operations.
Our shuttle, which seemed to be flying on automatic pilot, quickly reached the
planet and began to skim its mirrored surface. I stared out the window as we did
one complete orbit. As far as I knew, no gunter had ever been given this kind of
tour.
From pole to pole, IOI-1 was covered with armories, bunkers, warehouses,
and vehicle hangars. I also saw airfields dotting the surface, where rows of
gleaming gunships, spacecraft, and mechanized battle tanks stood waiting for
action. Sorrento said nothing as we surveyed the Sixer armada. He just let me
take it all in.
I’d seen screenshots of IOI-1’s surface before, but they’d been low-res and
taken from high orbit, just beyond the planet’s impressive defense grid. The

larger clans had been openly plotting to nuke the Sixer Operations Complex for
several years now, but they’d never managed to get past the defense grid or reach
the planet’s surface.
As we completed our orbit, the IOI Operations Complex swung into view
ahead of us. It consisted of three mirror-surfaced towers—two rectangular
skyscrapers on either side of a circular one. Seen from above, these three
buildings formed the IOI logo.
The shuttle slowed and hovered above the O-shaped tower, then spiraled down
to a small landing pad on the roof. “Impressive digs, wouldn’t you agree?”
Sorrento said, finally breaking his silence as we touched down and the ramp
lowered.
“Not bad.” I was proud of the calm in my voice. In truth, I was still reeling
from everything I’d just seen. “This is an OASIS replica of the real IOI towers
located in downtown Columbus, right?” I said.
Sorrento nodded. “Yes, the Columbus complex is our company headquarters.
Most of my team works in this central tower. Our close proximity to GSS
eliminates any possibility of system lag. And, of course, Columbus doesn’t
suffer from the rolling power blackouts that plague most major U.S. cities.”
He was stating the obvious. Gregarious Simulation Systems was located in
Columbus, and so was their main OASIS server vault. Redundant mirror servers
were located all over the world, but they were all linked to the main node in
Columbus. This was why, in the decades since the simulation’s launch, the city
had become a kind of high-tech Mecca. Columbus was where an OASIS user
could get the fastest, most reliable connection to the simulation. Most gunters
dreamed of moving there someday, me included.
I followed Sorrento off the shuttle and into an elevator adjacent to the landing
pad. “You’ve become quite the celebrity these past few days,” he said as we
began to descend. “It must be very exciting for you. Probably a little scary, too,
huh? Knowing you now possess information that millions of people would be
willing to kill for?”
I’d been waiting for him to say something like this, so I had a reply prepared.
“Do you mind skipping the scare tactics and the head games? Just tell me the
details of your offer. I have other matters to attend to.”
He grinned at me like I was a precocious child. “Yes, I’m sure you do,” he
said. “But please don’t jump to any conclusions about our offer. I think you’ll be
quite surprised.” Then, with a sudden touch of steel in his tone, he added, “In
fact, I’m certain of it.”
Doing my best to hide the intimidation I felt, I rolled my eyes and said,
“Whatever, man.”

A tone sounded as we reached the 106th floor, and the elevator doors swished
open. I followed Sorrento past another receptionist and down a long, brightly lit
corridor. The decor was something out of a utopian sci-fi flick. High-tech and
immaculate. We passed several other Sixer avatars as we walked, and the
moment they saw Sorrento, they each snapped to rigid attention and saluted him,
as if he were some high-ranking general. Sorrento didn’t return these salutes or
acknowledge his underlings in any way.
Eventually, he led me into a huge open room that appeared to occupy most of
the 106th floor. It contained a vast sea of high-walled cubicles, each containing a
single person strapped into a high-end immersion rig.
“Welcome to IOI’s Oology Division,” Sorrento said with obvious pride.
“So, this is Sux0rz Central, eh?” I said, glancing around.
“There’s no need to be rude,” Sorrento said. “This could be your team.”
“Would I get my very own cubicle?”
“No. You’d have your own office, with a very nice view.” He grinned. “Not
that you’d spend much time looking at it.”
I motioned to one of the new Habashaw immersion rigs. “Nice gear,” I said. It
really was, too. State-of-the-art.
“Yes, it is nice, isn’t it?” he said. “Our immersion rigs are heavily modified,
and they’re all networked together. Our systems allow multiple operators to
control any one of our oologist’s avatars. So depending on the obstacles an
avatar encounters during their quest, control can be instantly transferred to the
team member with the skills best suited to deal with the situation.”
“Yeah, but that’s cheating,” I said.
“Oh, come on now,” he said, rolling his eyes. “There’s no such thing.
Halliday’s contest doesn’t have any rules. That’s one of the many colossal
mistakes the old fool made.” Before I could reply, Sorrento started walking
again, leading me on through the maze of cubicles. “All of our oologists are
voice-linked to a support team,” he continued. “Composed of Halliday scholars,
videogame experts, pop-culture historians, and cryptologists. They all work
together to help each of our avatars overcome any challenge and solve every
puzzle they encounter.” He turned and grinned at me. “As you can see, we’ve
covered all the bases, Parzival. That’s why we’re going to win.”
“Yeah,” I said. “You guys have been doing a bang-up job so far. Bravo. Now,
why is it that we’re talking again? Oh, right. You guys have no clue where the
Copper Key is, and you need my help to find it.”
Sorrento narrowed his eyes; then he began to laugh. “I like you, kid,” he said,
grinning at me. “You’re bright. And you’ve got cojones. Two qualities I greatly
admire.”

We continued walking. A few minutes later, we arrived in Sorrento’s
enormous office. Its windows afforded a stunning view of the surrounding
“city.” The sky was filled with aircars and spacecraft, and the planet’s simulated
sun was just beginning to set. Sorrento sat down behind his desk and offered me
the chair directly across from him.
Here we go, I thought as I sat down. Play it cool, Wade.
“So I’ll just cut to the chase,” he said. “IOI wants to recruit you. As a
consultant, to assist with our search for Halliday’s Easter egg. You’ll have all of
our company’s vast resources at your disposal. Money, weapons, magic items,
ships, artifacts. You name it.”
“What would my title be?”
“Chief oologist,” he replied. “You’d be in charge of the entire division,
second-in-command only to me. I’m talking about five thousand highly trained
combat-ready avatars, all taking orders directly from you.”
“Sounds pretty sweet,” I said, trying hard to sound nonchalant.
“Of course it does. But there’s more. In exchange for your services, we’re
willing to pay you two million dollars a year, with a one-million-dollar signing
bonus up front. And if and when you help us find the egg, you’ll get a twentyfive-million-dollar bonus.”
I pretended to add all of those numbers up on my fingers. “Wow,” I said,
trying to sound impressed. “Can I work from home, too?”
Sorrento couldn’t seem to tell whether or not I was joking. “No,” he said. “I’m
afraid not. You’d have to relocate here to Columbus. But we’ll provide you with
excellent living quarters here on the premises. And a private office, of course.
Your own state-of-the-art immersion rig—”
“Hold on,” I said, holding up a hand. “You mean I’d have to live in the IOI
skyscraper? With you? And all of the other Sux— oologists?”
He nodded. “Just until you help us find the egg.”
I resisted the urge to gag. “What about benefits? Would I get health care?
Dental? Vision? Keys to the executive washroom? Shit like that?”
“Of course.” He was starting to sound impatient. “So? What do you say?”
“Can I think about it for a few days?”
“Afraid not,” he said. “This could all be over in a few days. We need your
answer now.”
I leaned back and stared at the ceiling, pretending to consider the offer.
Sorrento waited, watching me intently. I was about to give him my prepared
answer when he raised a hand.
“Just listen to me a moment before you answer,” Sorrento said. “I know most
gunters cling to the absurd notion that IOI is evil. And that the Sixers are ruthless

corporate drones with no honor and no respect for the ‘true spirit’ of the contest.
That we’re all sellouts. Right?”
I nodded, barely resisting the urge to say “That’s putting it mildly.”
“Well, that’s ridiculous,” he said, flashing an avuncular grin that I suspected
was generated by whatever diplomacy software he was running. “The Sixers are
really no different than a Gunter clan, albeit a well-funded one. We share all the
same obsessions as gunters. And we have the same goal.”
What goal is that? I wanted to shout. To ruin the OASIS forever? To pervert
and defile the only thing that has ever made our lives bearable?
Sorrento seemed to take my silence as a cue that he should continue. “You
know, contrary to popular belief, the OASIS really won’t change that drastically
when IOI takes control of it. Sure, we’ll have to start charging everyone a
monthly user fee. And increase the sim’s advertising revenue. But we also plan
to make a lot of improvements. Avatar content filters. Stricter construction
guidelines. We’re going to make the OASIS a better place.”
No, I thought. You’re going to turn it into a fascist corporate theme park
where the few people who can still afford the price of admission no longer have
an ounce of freedom.
I’d heard as much of this jerk’s sales pitch as I could stand.
“OK,” I said. “Count me in. Sign me up. Whatever you guys call it. I’m in.”
Sorrento looked surprised. This clearly wasn’t the answer he’d been
expecting. He smiled wide and was about to offer me his hand again when I cut
him off.
“But I have three minor conditions,” I said. “First, I want a fifty-million-dollar
bonus when I find the egg for you guys. Not twenty-five. Is that doable?”
He didn’t even hesitate. “Done. What are your other conditions?”
“I don’t want to be second-in-command,” I said. “I want your job, Sorrento. I
want to be in charge of the whole shebang. Chief of operations. El Numero Uno.
Oh, and I want everyone to have to call me El Numero Uno, too. Is that
possible?”
My mouth seemed to be operating independent of my brain. I couldn’t help
myself.
Sorrento’s smile had vanished. “What else?”
“I don’t want to work with you.” I leveled a finger at him. “You give me the
creeps. But if your superiors are willing to fire your ass and give me your
position, I’m in. It’s a done deal.”
Silence. Sorrento’s face was a stoic mask. He probably had certain emotions,
like anger and rage, filtered out on his facial-recognition software.
“Could you check with your bosses and let me know if they’ll agree to that?” I

asked. “Or are they monitoring us right now? I’m betting they are.” I waved to
the invisible cameras. “Hi, guys! What do you say?”
There was a long silence, during which Sorrento simply glared at me. “Of
course they’re monitoring us,” he said finally. “And they’ve just informed me
that they’re willing to agree to each of your demands.” He didn’t sound all that
upset.
“Really?” I said. “Great! When can I start? And more importantly, when can
you leave?”
“Immediately,” he said. “The company will prepare your contract and send it
to your lawyer for approval. Then we—they will fly you here to Columbus to
sign the paperwork and close the deal.” He stood. “That should conclude—”
“Actually—” I held up a hand, cutting him off again. “I’ve spent the last few
seconds thinking this over a bit more, and I’m gonna have to pass on your offer.
I think I’d rather find the egg on my own, thanks.” I stood up. “You and the other
Sux0rz can all go fuck a duck.”
Sorrento began to laugh. A long, hearty laugh that I found more than a little
disturbing. “Oh, you’re good! That was so good! You really had us going there,
kid!” When his laughter tapered off, he said, “That’s the answer I was expecting.
So now, let me give you our second proposal.”
“There’s more?” I sat back down and put my feet up on his desk. “OK.
Shoot.”
“We’ll wire five million dollars directly to your OASIS account, right now, in
exchange for a walkthrough up to the First Gate. That’s it. All you have to do is
give us detailed step-by-step instructions on how to do what you’ve already
done. We’ll take it from there. You’ll be free to continue searching for the egg on
your own. And our transaction will remain a complete secret. No one ever need
know of it.”
I admit, I actually considered it for a second. Five million dollars would set
me up for life. And even if I helped the Sixers clear the First Gate, there was no
guarantee they’d be able to clear the other two. I still wasn’t even sure if I would
be able to do that.
“Trust me, son,” Sorrento said. “You should take this offer. While you can.”
His paternal tone irked me to no end, and that helped to steel my resolve. I
couldn’t sell out to the Sixers. If I did, and they did somehow manage to win the
contest, I’d be the one responsible. There was no way I’d be able to live with
that. I just hoped that Aech, Art3mis, and any other gunters they approached felt
the same way.
“I’ll pass,” I said. I slid my feet off his desk and stood. “Thanks for your
time.”

Sorrento looked at me sadly, then motioned for me to sit back down.
“Actually, we’re not quite done here. We have one final proposal for you,
Parzival. And I saved the best for last.”
“Can’t you take a hint? You can’t buy me. So piss off. Adios. Good. Bye.”
“Sit down, Wade.”
I froze. Had he just used my real name?
“That’s right,” Sorrento barked. “We know who you are. Wade Owen Watts.
Born August twelfth, 2024. Both parents deceased. And we also know where
you are. You reside with your aunt, in a trailer park located at 700 Portland
Avenue in Oklahoma City. Unit 56-K, to be exact. According to our surveillance
team, you were last seen entering your aunt’s trailer three days ago and you
haven’t left since. Which means you’re still there right now.”
A vidfeed window opened directly behind him, displaying a live video image
of the stacks where I lived. It was an aerial view, maybe being shot from a plane
or a satellite. From this angle, they could only monitor the trailer’s two main
exits. So they hadn’t seen me leave through the laundry room window each
morning, or return through it each night. They didn’t know I was actually in my
hideout right now.
“There you are,” Sorrento said. His pleasant, condescending tone had
returned. “You should really get out more, Wade. It’s not healthy to spend all of
your time indoors.” The image magnified a few times, zooming in on my aunt’s
trailer. Then it switched over to thermal-imaging mode, and I could see the
glowing outlines of over a dozen people, children and adults, sitting inside.
Nearly all of them were motionless—probably logged into the OASIS.
I was too stunned to speak. How had they found me? It was supposed to be
impossible for anyone to obtain your OASIS account information. And my
address wasn’t even in my OASIS account. You didn’t have to provide it when
you created your avatar. Just your name and retinal pattern. So how had they
found out where I lived?
Somehow they must have gotten access to my school records.
“Your first instinct right now might be to log out and make a run for it,”
Sorrento said. “I urge you not to make that mistake. Your trailer is currently
wired with a large quantity of high explosives.” He pulled something that looked
like a remote control out of his pocket and held it up. “And my finger is on the
detonator. If you log out of this chatlink session, you will die within a few
seconds. Do you understand what I’m saying to you, Mr. Watts?”
I nodded slowly, trying desperately to get a grip on the situation.
He was bluffing. He had to be bluffing. And even if he wasn’t, he didn’t know
that I was actually half a mile away, in my hideout. Sorrento assumed that one of

the glowing thermal outlines on the display was me.
If a bomb really did go off in my aunt’s trailer, I’d be safe down here, under all
these junk cars. Wouldn’t I? Besides, they would never kill all those people just
to get to me.
“How—?” That was all I could get out.
“How did we find out who you are? And where you live?” He grinned. “Easy.
You screwed up, kid. When you enrolled in the OASIS public school system,
you gave them your name and address. So they could mail you your report cards,
I suppose.”
He was right. My avatar’s name, my real name, and my home address were all
stored in my private student file, which only the principal could access. It was a
stupid mistake, but I’d enrolled the year before the contest even began. Before I
became a gunter. Before I learned to conceal my real-world identity.
“How did you find out I attend school online?” I asked. I already knew the
answer, but I needed to stall for time.
“There’s been a rumor circulating on the gunter message boards the past few
days that you and your pal Aech both go to school on Ludus. When we heard
that, we decided to contact a few OPS administrators and offer them a bribe. Do
you know how little a school administrator makes a year, Wade? It’s scandalous.
One of your principals was kind enough to search the student database for the
avatar name Parzival, and guess what?”
Another window appeared beside the live video feed of the stacks. It
displayed my entire student profile. My full name, avatar name, student alias
(Wade3), date of birth, Social Security number, and home address. My school
transcripts. It was all there, along with an old yearbook photo, taken over five
years ago—right before I’d transferred to school in the OASIS.
“We have your friend Aech’s school records too. But he was smart enough to
give a fake name and address when he enrolled. So finding him will take a bit
longer.”
He paused OASIS{y0u_fou7d_m3} to let me reply, but I remained silent. My pulse was racing, and I
had to keep reminding myself to breathe.
“So, that brings me to our final proposal.” Sorrento rubbed his hands together
excitedly, like a kid about to open a present. “Tell us how to reach the First Gate.
Right now. Or we will kill you. Right now.”
“You’re bluffing,” I heard myself say. But I didn’t think he was. Not at all.
“No, Wade. I’m not. Think about it. With everything else that’s going on in
the world, do you think anyone will care about an explosion in some ghetto-trash
rat warren in Oklahoma City? They’ll assume it was a drug-lab accident. Or
maybe a domestic terrorist cell trying to build a homemade bomb. Either way, it

will just mean there are a few hundred less human cockroaches out there
collecting food vouchers and using up precious oxygen. No one will care. And
the authorities won’t even blink.”
He was right, and I knew it. I tried to stall for a few seconds so I could figure
out what to do. “You’d kill me?” I said. “To win a videogame contest?”
“Don’t pretend to be naïve, Wade,” Sorrento said. “There are billions of
dollars at stake here, along with control of one of the world’s most profitable
corporations, and of the OASIS itself. This is much more than a videogame
contest. It always has been.” He leaned forward. “But you can still come out a
winner here, kid. If you help us, we’ll still give you the five million. You can
retire at age eighteen and spend the rest of your days living like royalty. Or you
can die in the next few seconds. It’s your call. But ask yourself this question—if
your mother were still alive, what would she want you to do?”
That last question would really have pissed me off if I hadn’t been so scared.
“What’s to stop you from killing me after I give you what you want?” I asked.
“Regardless of what you may think, we don’t want to have to kill anyone
unless it’s absolutely necessary. Besides, there are two more gates, right?” He
shrugged. “We might need your help to figure those out too. Personally, I doubt
it. But my superiors feel differently. Regardless, you don’t really have a choice at
this point, do you?” He lowered his voice, as if he were about to share a secret.
“So here’s what’s going to happen next. You’re going to give me step-by-step
instructions on how to obtain the Copper Key and clear the First Gate. And
you’re going to stay logged into this chatlink session while we verify everything
you tell us. Log out before I say it’s OK, and your whole world goes boom.
Understand? Now start talking.”
I considered giving them what they wanted. I really did. But I thought it
through, and I couldn’t come up with a single good reason why they would let
me live, even if I helped them clear the First Gate. The only move that made
sense was to kill me and take me out of the running. They sure as hell weren’t
going to give me five million dollars, or leave me alive to tell the media how IOI
had blackmailed me. Especially if there really was a remote-controlled bomb
planted in my trailer to serve as evidence.
No. The way I saw it, there were really only two possibilities: Either they
were bluffing or they were going to kill me, whether I helped them or not.
I made my decision and summoned my courage.
“Sorrento,” I said, trying to hide the fear in my voice, “I want you and your
bosses to know something. You’re never going to find Halliday’s egg. You know
why? Because he was smarter than all of you put together. It doesn’t matter how
much money you have or who you try to blackmail. You’re going to lose.”

I tapped my Log-out icon, and my avatar began to dematerialize in front of
him. He didn’t seem surprised. He just looked at me sadly and shook his head.
“Stupid move, kid,” he said, just before my visor went black.
I sat there in the darkness of my hideout, wincing and waiting for the
detonation. But a full minute passed and nothing happened.
I slid my visor up and pulled off my gloves with shaking hands. As my eyes
began to adjust to the darkness, I let out a tentative sigh of relief. It had been a
bluff after all. Sorrento had been playing an elaborate mind game with me. An
effective one too.
As I was gulping down a bottle of water, I realized that I should log back in
and warn Aech and Art3mis. The Sixers would go after them next.
I was pulling my gloves back on when I heard the explosion.
I felt the shock wave a split second after I heard the detonation and
instinctively dropped to the floor of my hideout with my arms wrapped over my
head. In the distance, I could hear the sound of rending metal as several trailer
stacks began to collapse, ripping free of their scaffolding and crashing against
one another like massive dominoes. These horrific sounds continued for what
seemed like a very long time. Then it was silent again.
I eventually overcame my paralysis and opened the rear door of the van. In a
nightmare-like daze, I made my way to the outskirts of the junk pile, and from
there, I could see a giant pillar of smoke and flames rising from the opposite end
of the stacks.
I followed the stream of people already running in that direction, along the
northern perimeter of the stacks. The stack containing my aunt’s trailer had
collapsed into a fiery, smoking ruin, along with all of the stacks adjacent to it.
There was nothing there now but a massive pile of twisted, flaming metal.
I kept my distance, but a large crowd of people had already gathered up ahead
of me, standing as close to the blaze as they dared. No one bothered trying to
enter the wreckage to look for survivors. It was obvious there weren’t going to
be any.
An ancient propane tank attached to one of the crushed trailers detonated in a
small explosion, causing the crowd to scatter and dive for cover. Several more
tanks detonated in rapid succession. After that, the onlookers moved much
farther back and kept their distance.
The residents who lived in the nearby stacks knew that if the fire spread, they
were in big trouble. So a lot of people were already scrambling to fight the blaze,
using garden hoses, buckets, empty Big Gulp cups, and whatever else they could
find. Before long, the flames were contained and the fire began to die out.
As I watched in silence, I could already hear the people around me

murmuring, saying that it was probably another meth-lab accident, or that some
idiot must have been trying to build a homemade bomb. Just as Sorrento had
predicted.
That thought snapped me out of my daze. What was I thinking? The Sixers
had just tried to kill me. They probably still had agents lurking here in the stacks,
checking to make sure I was dead. And like a total idiot I was standing right out
in the open.
I faded away from the crowd and hurried back to my hideout, being careful
not to run, constantly glancing over my shoulder to make sure I wasn’t being
followed. Once I was back inside the van, I slammed and locked the door, then
curled into a quivering ball in the corner. I stayed like that for a long time.
Eventually, the shock began to wear off, and the reality of what had just
happened started to sink in. My aunt Alice and her boyfriend Rick were dead,
along with everyone who had lived in our trailer, and in the trailers below and
around it. Including sweet old Mrs. Gilmore. And if I had been at home, I would
be dead now too.
I was jacked up on adrenaline, unsure of what to do next, overcome by a
paralyzing mixture of fear and rage. I thought about logging into the OASIS to
call the police, but then considered how they would react when I told them my
story. They’d think I was a raving nut job. And if I called the media, they’d react
the same way. There was no way anyone would believe my story. Not unless I
revealed that I was Parzival, and maybe not even then. I didn’t have a shred of
proof against Sorrento and the Sixers. All traces of the bomb they’d planted were
probably melting into slag right now.
Revealing my identity to the world so that I could accuse one of the world’s
most powerful corporations of blackmail and murder didn’t seem like the
smartest move. No one would believe me. I could barely believe it myself. IOI
had actually tried to kill me. To prevent me from winning a videogame contest.
It was insane.
I seemed to be safe in my hideout for the moment, but I knew I couldn’t stay
in the stacks much longer. When the Sixers found out I was still alive, they
would come back here looking for me. I needed to get the hell out of Dodge. But
I couldn’t do that until I had some money, and my first endorsement checks
wouldn’t be deposited for another day or two. I would just have to lie low until
then. But right now, I needed to talk to Aech, to warn him that he was next on
the Sixers’ hit list.
I was also desperate to see a friendly face.

I grabbed my OASIS console and powered it on, then pulled on my visor and
gloves. As I logged in, my avatar reappeared on Ludus, on the hilltop where I’d
been sitting prior to my chat-room session with Sorrento. The moment my audio
kicked in, I heard the earsplitting roar of engines coming from somewhere
directly overheard. I stepped out from under the tree and looked up. I saw a
squadron of Sixer gunships flying in formation, zooming south at low altitude,
their sensors scanning the surface as they went.
I was about to duck back under the tree, out of sight, when I remembered that
all of Ludus was a no-PvP zone. The Sixers couldn’t harm me here. Even so, my
nerves were still on edge. I continued to scan the sky and quickly spotted two
more Sixer gunship squadrons off near the eastern horizon. A moment later,
several more squadrons dropped in from orbit to the north and west. It looked
like an alien invasion.
An icon flashed on my display, informing me that I had a new text message
from Aech: Where the hell are you? Call me ASAFP!
I tapped his name on my contact list, and he answered on the first ring. His
avatar’s face appeared in my vidfeed window. He was wearing a grim
expression.
“Did you hear the news?” he asked.
“What news?”
“The Sixers are on Ludus. Thousands of them. More arriving every minute.
They’re searching the planet, looking for the tomb.”
“Yeah. I’m on Ludus right now. Sixer gunships everywhere.”
Aech scowled. “When I find I-r0k, I’m going to kill him. Slowly. Then, when
he creates a new avatar, I’m going to hunt him down and kill him again. If that
moron had kept his mouth shut, the Sixers never would have thought to look
here.”
“Yeah. His forum posts were what tipped them off. Sorrento said so himself.”
“Sorrento? As in Nolan Sorrento?”

I told him everything that had happened in the past few hours.
“They blew up your house?”
“Actually, it was a trailer,” I said. “In a trailer park. They killed a lot of people
here, Aech. It’s probably already on the newsfeeds.” I took a deep breath. “I’m
freaking out. I’m scared.”
“I don’t blame you,” he said. “Thank God you weren’t home when it
happened.…”
I nodded. “I almost never log in from home. Luckily, the Sixers didn’t know
that.”
“What about your family?”
“It was my aunt’s place. She’s dead, I think. We … we weren’t very close.”
This was a huge understatement, of course. My aunt Alice had never shown me
much kindness, but she still hadn’t deserved to die. But most of the wrenching
guilt I now felt had to do with Mrs. Gilmore, and the knowledge that my actions
had gotten her killed. She was one of the sweetest people I’d ever known.
I realized that I was sobbing. I muted my audio so Aech wouldn’t hear, then
took several deep breaths until I got myself under control again.
“I can’t believe this!” Aech growled. “Those evil pricks. They’re gonna pay,
Z. Count on it. We will make them pay for this.”
I couldn’t see how, but I didn’t argue. I knew he was just trying to make me
feel better.
“Where are you right now?” Aech asked. “Do you need help? Like, a place to
stay or something? I can wire you some money if you need it.”
“No, I’m OK,” I said. “But thanks, man. I really appreciate the offer.”
“De nada, amigo.”
“Listen, did the Sixers send you the same e-mail they sent me?”
“Yeah. Thousands of them. But I decided it was best to ignore them.”
I frowned. “I wish I’d been smart enough to do that.”
“Dude, you had no way of knowing they were gonna try and kill you! Besides,
they already had your home address. If you’d ignored their e-mails, they
probably would have set off that bomb anyway.”
“Listen, Aech … Sorrento said that your school records contained a fake
home address, and that they don’t know where to find you. But he might have
been lying. You should leave home. Go somewhere safe. As soon as possible.”
“Don’t worry about me, Z. I stay mobile. Those bastards will never find me.”
“If you say so,” I replied, wondering what exactly he meant. “But I need to
warn Art3mis, too. And Daito and Shoto, if I can reach them. The Sixers are
probably doing everything they can to learn their identities too.”
“That gives me an idea,” he said. “We should invite all three of them to meet

us in the Basement later tonight. Say around midnight? A private chat-room
session. Just the five of us.”
My mood brightened at the prospect of seeing Art3mis again. “Do you think
they’ll all agree to come?”
“Yeah, if we let them know their lives depend on it.” He smirked. “And we’re
going to have the world’s top five gunters together in one chat room. Who’s
gonna sit that out?”

I sent Art3mis a short message, asking her to meet us in Aech’s private chat
room at midnight. She replied just a few minutes later, promising to be there.
Aech told me he’d managed to reach Daito and Shoto, and they had both also
agreed to attend. The meeting was set.
I didn’t feel like being alone, so I logged into the Basement about an hour
early. Aech was already there, surfing the newsfeeds on the ancient RCA
television. Without saying a word, he got up and gave me a hug. Even though I
couldn’t actually feel it, I found it surprisingly comforting. Then we both sat
down and watched the news coverage together while we waited for the others to
arrive.
Every channel was airing OASIS footage showing the hordes of Sixer
spacecraft and troops that were currently arriving on Ludus. It was easy for
everyone to guess why they were there, and so now every gunter in the
simulation was also headed for Ludus. Transport terminals all over the planet
were jammed with incoming avatars.
“So much for keeping the tomb’s location a secret,” I said, shaking my head.
“It was bound to leak out eventually,” Aech said, shutting off the TV. “I just
didn’t think it would happen this fast.”
We both heard an entrance alert chime as Art3mis materialized at the top of
the staircase. She was wearing the same outfit she’d had on the night we met.
She waved to me as she descended the steps. I waved back, then made
introductions.
“Aech, meet Art3mis. Art3mis, this is my best friend, Aech.”
“Pleasure to meet you,” Art3mis said, extending her right hand.
Aech shook it. “Likewise.” He flashed his Cheshire grin. “Thanks for
coming.”
“Are you kidding? How could I miss it? The very first meeting of the High
Five.”
“The High Five?” I said.
“Yeah,” Aech said. “That’s what they’re calling us on all of the message

boards now. We hold the top five high-score slots on the Scoreboard. So we’re
the High Five.”
“Right,” I said. “At least for the time being.”
Art3mis grinned at that, then turned and began to wander around the
Basement, admiring the ’80s decor. “Aech, this is, by far, the coolest chat room
I’ve ever seen.”
“Thank you.” He bowed his head. “Kind of you to say.”
She stopped to browse through the shelf of role-playing game supplements.
“You’ve re-created Morrow’s basement perfectly. Every last detail. I want to live
here.”
“You’ve got a permanent spot on the guest list. Log in and hang out anytime.”
“Really?” she said, clearly delighted. “Thank you! I will. You’re the man,
Aech.”
“Yes,” he said, smiling. “It’s true. I am.”
They really seemed to be hitting it off, and it was making me crazy jealous. I
didn’t want Art3mis to like Aech, or vice versa. I wanted her all to myself.
Daito and Shoto logged in a moment later, appearing simultaneously at the top
of the basement staircase. Daito was the taller of the two, and appeared to be in
his late teens. Shoto was a foot shorter and looked much younger. Maybe about
thirteen. Both avatars looked Japanese, and they bore a striking resemblance to
one another, like snapshots of the same young man taken five years apart. They
wore matching suits of traditional samurai armor, and each had both a short
wakizashi and a longer katana strapped to his belt.
“Greetings,” the taller samurai said. “I am Daito. And this is my little brother,
Shoto. Thank you for the invitation. We are honored to meet all three of you.”
They bowed in unison. Aech and Art3mis returned the bow, and I quickly
followed suit. As we each introduced ourselves, Daito and Shoto bowed to us
once again, and once again we each returned the gesture.
“All right,” Aech said, once all the bowing had ended. “Let’s get this party
started. I’m sure you’ve all seen the news. The Sixers are swarming all over
Ludus. Thousands of them. They’re conducting a systematic search of the entire
surface of the planet. Even if they don’t know exactly what they’re looking for, it
still won’t be long before they find the entrance to the tomb—”
“Actually,” Art3mis interrupted, “they already found it. Over thirty minutes
ago.”
We all turned to look at her.
“That hasn’t been reported on the newsfeeds yet,” Daito said. “Are you sure?”
She nodded. “Afraid so. When I heard about the Sixers this morning, I
decided to hide an uplink camera in some trees near the tomb entrance, to keep

an eye on the area.” She opened a vidfeed window in the air in front of her and
spun it around so the rest of us could see. It showed a wide shot of the flattopped hill and the clearing around it, looking down from a spot in one of the
trees high above. From this angle, it was easy to see that the large black stones
on top of the hill were arranged to look like a human skull. We could also see
that the entire area was crawling with Sixers, and more seemed to be arriving
every second.
But the most disturbing thing we saw on the vidfeed was the large transparent
dome of energy that now covered the entire hill.
“Son of a bitch,” Aech said. “Is that what I think it is?”
Art3mis nodded. “A force field. The Sixers installed it just after the first of
them arrived. So …”
“So from here on out,” Daito said, “any gunter who finds the tomb won’t be
able to get inside. Not unless they can somehow get through that force field.”
“Actually, they’ve put up two force fields,” Art3mis said. “A small field with a
larger field over it. They lower them in sequence, whenever they want to let
more Sixers enter the tomb. Like an air lock.” She pointed to the window.
“Watch. They’re doing it now.”
A squadron of Sixers marched down the loading ramp of a gunship parked
nearby. They were all lugging equipment containers. As they approached the
outer force field, it vanished, revealing a smaller domed field inside the first. As
soon as the squadron reached the wall of the inner force field, the outer field
reappeared. A second later, the inner force field was dropped, allowing the
Sixers to enter the tomb.
There was a long silence while we all contemplated this new development.
“I suppose it could be worse,” Aech said finally. “If the tomb were in a PvP
zone, those assholes would already have laser cannons and robot sentries
mounted everywhere, to vaporize anyone who approached the area.”
He was right. Since Ludus was a safe zone, the Sixers couldn’t harm gunters
who approached the tomb. But there was nothing to stop them from erecting a
force field to keep them out. So that was exactly what they’d done.
“The Sixers have obviously been planning for this moment for some time
now,” Art3mis said, closing her vidfeed window.
“They won’t be able to keep everyone out for very long,” Aech said. “When
the clans find out about this, it’ll be all-out war. There will be thousands of
gunters attacking that force field with everything they’ve got. RPGs. Fireballs.
Cluster bombs. Nukes. It’s gonna get ugly. They’ll turn that forest into a
wasteland.”
“Yeah, but in the meantime, Sixer avatars will be farming the Copper Key and

then filing their avatars through the First Gate, one after another, in a freakin’
conga line.”
“But how can they do this?” Shoto asked, his young voice brimming with
rage. He looked to his brother. “It’s not fair. They’re not playing fair.”
“They don’t have to. There are no laws in the OASIS, little brother,” Daito
said. “The Sixers can do whatever they please. They won’t stop until someone
stops them.”
“The Sixers have no honor,” Shoto said, scowling.
“You guys don’t know the half of it,” Aech said. “That’s why Parzival and I
asked you all here.” He turned to me. “Z, do you want to tell them what
happened?”
I nodded and turned to the others. First, I told them about the e-mail I’d
received from IOI. They’d all received the same invitation, but had wisely
ignored it. Then I related the details of my chat-room session with Sorrento,
doing my best not to leave anything out. Finally, I told them how our
conversation had ended—with a bomb detonating at my home address. By the
time I’d finished, their avatars all wore looks of stunned disbelief.
“Jesus,” Art3mis whispered. “No joke? They tried to kill you?”
“Yeah. They would have succeeded, too, if I’d been at home. I was just
lucky.”
“Now you all know how far the Sixers are willing to go to stop us from
beating them to the egg,” Aech said. “If they’re able to locate any one of us,
we’re dead meat.”
I nodded. “So you should all take precautions to protect yourselves and your
identities,” I said. “If you haven’t already.”
They all nodded. There was another long silence.
“There’s still one thing I don’t understand,” Art3mis said a moment later.
“How did the Sixers know to look for the tomb on Ludus? Did someone tip them
off?” She glanced around at each of us, but there was no hint of accusation in her
voice.
“They must have seen the rumors about Parzival and Aech that were posted
on all of the gunter message boards,” Shoto said. “That’s how we knew to look
there.”
Daito winced, then punched his little brother in the shoulder. “Didn’t I tell you
to keep quiet, blabbermouth?” he hissed. Shoto looked sheepish and clammed
up.
“What rumors?” Art3mis asked. She looked at me. “What’s he talking about?
I haven’t had time to check the boards in a few days.”
“Several posts were made by gunters who claimed to know Parzival and

Aech, saying they were both students on Ludus.” He turned to Aech and me.
“My brother and I have spent the past two years searching for the Tomb of
Horrors. We’ve scoured dozens of worlds looking for it. But we never thought to
look on Ludus. Not until we heard that you attended school there.”
“It never occurred to me that attending school on Ludus was something I
needed to keep a secret,” I said. “So I didn’t.”
“Yeah, and it’s lucky for us that you didn’t,” Aech said. He turned to the
others. “Parzival unintentionally tipped me off about the tomb’s location, too. I
never thought to look for it on Ludus, either, until his name appeared on the
Scoreboard.”
Daito nudged his younger brother, and they both faced me and bowed. “You
were the first to find the tomb’s hiding place, so we owe you our gratitude for
leading us to it.”
I returned their bow. “Thanks, guys. But actually, Art3mis here found it first.
Totally on her own. A month before I did.”
“Yeah, for all the good it did me,” Art3mis said. “I couldn’t defeat the lich at
Joust. I’d been at it for weeks when this punk showed up and did it on his first
try.” She explained how we met, and how she finally managed to beat the king
the following day, right after the server reset at midnight.
“I have Aech here to thank for my jousting prowess,” I said. “We used to play
all the time, here in the Basement. That’s the only reason I beat the king on my
first attempt.”
“Ditto,” Aech said. He stretched out his hand and we bumped fists.
Daito and Shoto both smiled. “It was the same with us,” Daito said. “My
brother and I have been playing Joust against one another for years, because the
game was mentioned in Anorak’s Almanac.”
“Great,” Art3mis said, throwing up her hands. “Good for you guys. You were
all prepared in advance. I’m so happy for you. Bravo.” She gave us all a
sarcastic golf clap, which made everyone laugh. “Now, can we adjourn the
Mutual Admiration Society and get back to the topic at hand?”
“Sure,” Aech said, smiling. “What was the topic at hand?”
“The Sixers?” Art3mis offered.
“Right! Of course!” Aech rubbed the back of his neck while biting his lower
lip, something he always did when he was trying to gather his thoughts. “You
said they found the tomb less than an hour ago, right? So any minute now,
they’ll reach the throne room and face off against the lich. But what do you think
happens when multiple avatars enter the burial chamber at the same time?”
I turned to Daito and Shoto. “Your names appeared on the Scoreboard on the
same day, just a few minutes apart. So you entered the throne room together,

didn’t you?”
Daito nodded. “Yes,” he said. “And when we stepped on the dais, two copies
of the king appeared, one for each of us to play.”
“Great,” Art3mis said. “So it might be possible for hundreds of Sixers to joust
for the Copper Key at the same time. Or even thousands.”
“Yeah,” Shoto said. “But to get the key, each Sixer has to beat the lich at
Joust, which we all know isn’t easy.”
“The Sixers are using hacked immersion rigs,” I said. “Sorrento was boasting
about it to me. They’ve got it set up so that different users can control the actions
of every one of their avatars. So they can just have their best Joust players take
control of each Sixer avatar during the match against Acererak. One after the
other.”
“Cheating bastards,” Aech repeated.
“The Sixers have no honor,” Daito said, shaking his head.
“Yeah,” Art3mis said, rolling her eyes. “We’ve established that.”
“It gets worse,” I said. “Every Sixer has a support team made up of Halliday
scholars, videogame experts, and cryptologists who are there to help them beat
every challenge and solve every puzzle they encounter. Playing through the
WarGames simulation will be a piece of cake for them. Someone will just feed
them the dialogue.”
“Unbelievable,” Aech muttered. “How are we supposed to compete with
that?”
“We can’t,” Art3mis said. “Once they have the Copper Key, they’ll probably
locate the First Gate just as quickly as we all did. It won’t take them very long to
catch up with us. And once they have the riddle about the Jade Key, they’ll have
their eggheads working around the clock to decipher it.”
“If they find the Jade Key’s hiding place before we do, they’ll barricade it,
too,” I said. “And then the five of us will be in the same boat everyone else is in
right now.”
Art3mis nodded. Aech kicked the coffee table in frustration. “This isn’t even
remotely fair,” he said. “The Sixers have a huge advantage over all of us.
They’ve got an endless supply of money, weapons, vehicles, and avatars. There
are thousands of them, all working together.”
“Right,” I said. “And each of us is on our own. Well, except for you two.” I
nodded at Daito and Shoto. “But you know what I mean. They’ve got us
outnumbered and outgunned, and that isn’t going to change anytime soon.”
“What are you suggesting?” Daito asked. He suddenly sounded uneasy.
“I’m not suggesting anything,” I said. “I’m just stating the facts, as I see
them.”

“Good,” Daito replied. “Because it sounded like you were about to propose
some sort of alliance between the five of us.”
Aech studied him carefully. “So? Would that be such a terrible idea?”
“Yes, it would,” Daito said curtly. “My brother and I hunt alone. We don’t
want or need your help.”
“Oh really?” Aech said. “A second ago, you admitted needing Parzival’s help
to find the Tomb of Horrors.”
Daito’s eyes narrowed. “We would have found it on our own eventually.”
“Right,” Aech said. “It probably would have only taken you another five
years.”
“Come on, Aech,” I said, stepping between them. “This isn’t helping.”
Aech and Daito glared at each other in silence, while Shoto stared up at his
brother uncertainly. Art3mis just stood back and watched, looking somewhat
amused.
“We didn’t come here to be insulted,” Daito said finally. “We’re leaving.”
“Hold on, Daito,” I said. “Just wait a second, will you? Let’s just talk this out.
We shouldn’t part as enemies. We’re all on the same side here.”
“No,” Daito said. “We’re not. You’re all strangers to us. For all we know, any
one of you could be a Sixer spy.”
Art3mis laughed out loud at that, then covered her mouth. Daito ignored her.
“This is pointless,” he said. “Only one person can be the first to find the egg and
win the prize,” he said. “And that person will be either me or my brother.”
And with that, Daito and Shoto both abruptly logged out.
“That went well,” Art3mis said, once their avatars had vanished.
I nodded. “Yeah, real smooth, Aech. Way to build bridges.”
“What did I do?” he said defensively. “Daito was being a complete asshole!
Besides, it’s not like we were asking him to team up, anyway. I’m an avowed
solo. And so are you. And Art3mis here looks like the lone-wolf type too.”
“Guilty as charged,” she said, grinning. “But even so, there is an argument to
be made for forming an alliance against the Sixers.”
“Maybe,” Aech said. “But think about it. If you find the Jade Key before
either of us do, are you going to be generous and tell us where it is?”
Art3mis smirked. “Of course not.”
“Me neither,” Aech said. “So there’s no point in discussing an alliance.”
Art3mis shrugged. “Well, then it looks like the meeting is over. I should
probably get going.” She winked at me. “The clock is ticking. Right, boys?”
“Tick tock,” I said.
“Good luck, fellas.” She gave us both a wave. “See ya around.”
“See ya,” we both answered in unison.

I watched her avatar slowly disappear, then turned to find Aech smiling at me.
“What are you grinning about?” I asked.
“You’ve got a crush on her, don’t you?”
“What? On Art3mis? No—”
“Don’t deny it, Z. You were making googly eyes at her the whole time she
was here.” He did his impression of this, clasping both hands to his chest and
batting his eyelashes like a silent film star. “I recorded the whole chat session.
Do you want me to play it back for you, so you can see how silly you looked?”
“Stop being a dick.”
“It’s understandable, man,” Aech said. “That girl is super cute.”
“So, have you had any luck with the new riddle?” I said, deliberately changing
the subject. “That quatrain about the Jade Key?”
“Quatrain?”
“ ‘A poem or stanza with four lines and an alternating rhyme scheme,’ ” I
recited. “It’s called a quatrain.”
Aech rolled his eyes. “You’re too much, man.”
“What? That’s the proper term for it, asshead!”
“It’s just a riddle, dude. And no. I haven’t had any luck figuring it out yet.”
“Me neither,” I said. “So we probably shouldn’t be standing around jabbering
at each other. Time to put our noses to the grindstone.”
“I concur,” he said. “But—”
Just then, a stack of comic books on the other side of the room slid off the end
table where they were piled and crashed to the floor, as if something had
knocked them over. Aech and I both jumped, then exchanged confused looks.
“What the hell was that?” I said.
“I don’t know.” Aech walked over and examined the scattered comics.
“Maybe a software glitch or something?”
“I’ve never seen a chat-room glitch like that,” I said, scanning the empty
room. “Could someone else be in here? An invisible avatar, eavesdropping on
us?”
Aech rolled his eyes. “No way, Z,” he said. “You’re getting way too paranoid.
This is an encrypted private chat room. No one can enter without my permission.
You know that.”
“Right,” I said, still freaked out.
“Relax. It was a glitch.” He rested a hand on my shoulder. “Listen. Let me
know if you change your mind about needing a loan. Or a place to crash. OK?”
“I’ll be all right,” I said. “But thanks, amigo.”
We bumped fists again, like the Wonder Twins activating their powers.
“I’ll catch you later. Good luck, Z.”

“Same to you, Aech.”

A few hours later, the remaining slots on the Scoreboard began to fill up, one
after another, in rapid succession. Not with avatar names, but with IOI employee
numbers. Each would appear with a score of 5,000 points (which now appeared
to be the fixed value for obtaining the Copper Key); then the score would jump
by another 100,000 points a few hours later, once that Sixer had cleared the First
Gate. By the end of the day, the Scoreboard looked like this:
HIGH SCORES:
1. Parzival
2. Art3mis
3. Aech
4. Daito
5. Shoto
6. IOI-655321
7. IOI-643187
8. IOI-621671
9. IOI-678324
10. IOI-637330

110,000
109,000
108,000
107,000
106,000
105,000
105,000
105,000
105,000
105,000

I recognized the first Sixer employee number to appear, because I’d seen it
printed on Sorrento’s uniform. He’d probably insisted that his avatar be the first
to obtain the Copper Key and clear the gate. But I had a hard time believing he’d
done it on his own. There was no way he was that good at Joust. Or that he knew
WarGames by heart. But I now knew that he didn’t have to be. When he reached
a challenge he couldn’t handle, like winning at Joust, he could just hand control
of his avatar off to one of his underlings. And during the WarGames challenge

he’d probably just had someone feeding him all of the dialogue via his hacked
immersion rig.
Once the remaining empty slots were filled, the Scoreboard began to grow in
length, to display rankings beyond tenth place. Before long, twenty avatars were
listed on the Scoreboard. Then thirty. Over the next twenty-four hours, over sixty
Sixer avatars cleared the First Gate.
Meanwhile, Ludus had become the most popular destination in the OASIS.
Transport terminals all over the planet were spitting out a steady stream of
gunters who then swarmed across the globe, creating chaos and disrupting
classes on every school campus. The OASIS Public School Board saw the
writing on the wall, and the decision was quickly made to evacuate Ludus and
relocate all of its schools to a new location. An identical copy of the planet,
Ludus II, was created in the same sector, a short distance away from the original.
All students were given a day off from school while a backup copy of the
planet’s original source code was copied over to the new site (minus the Tomb of
Horrors code Halliday had secretly added to it at some point). Classes resumed
on Ludus II the following day, and Ludus was left for the Sixers and gunters to
fight over.
News spread quickly that the Sixers were encamped around a small flattopped hill at the center of a remote forest. The tomb’s exact location appeared
on the message boards that evening, along with screenshots showing the force
field the Sixers had erected to keep everyone else out. These screenshots also
clearly showed the skull pattern of the stones on the hilltop. In a matter of hours,
the connection to the Tomb of Horrors D&D module was posted to every single
gunter message board. Then it hit the newsfeeds.
All of the large gunter clans immediately banded together to launch a fullscale assault on the Sixers’ force field, trying everything they could think of to
bring it down or circumvent it. The Sixers had installed teleportation disruptors,
which prevented anyone from transporting inside the force field via
technological means. They had also stationed a team of high-level wizards
around the tomb. These magic users cast spells around the clock, keeping the
entire area encased in a temporary null-magic zone. This prevented the force
fields from being bypassed by any magical means.
The clans began to bombard the outer force field with rockets, missiles, nukes,
and harsh language. They laid siege to the tomb all night, but the following
morning, both force fields remained intact.
In desperation, the clans decided to break out the heavy artillery. They pooled
their resources and purchased two very expensive, very powerful antimatter
bombs on eBay. They detonated both of them in sequence, just a few seconds

apart. The first bomb took down the outer shield, and the second bomb finished
the job. The moment the second force field went down, thousands of gunters (all
unharmed by the bomb blasts, due to the no-PvP zone) swarmed into the tomb
and clogged the corridors of the dungeon below. Soon, thousands of gunters (and
Sixers) had crammed into the burial chamber, all ready to challenge the lich king
to a game of Joust. Multiple copies of the king appeared, one for every avatar
who set foot on the dais. Ninety-five percent of the gunters who challenged him
lost and were then killed. But a few gunters were successful, and at the bottom
of the Scoreboard, listed after the High Five and the dozens of IOI employee
numbers, new avatar names began to appear. Within a few days, the list of
avatars on the Scoreboard was over a hundred names long.
Now that the area was full of gunters, it became impossible for the Sixers to
put their force field back in operation. Gunters were mobbing them and
destroying their ships and equipment on sight. So the Sixers gave up on their
barricade, but they continued to send avatars into the Tomb of Horrors to farm
copies of the Copper Key. No one could do anything to stop them.

The day after the explosion in the stacks, there was a brief story about it on one
of the local newsfeeds. They showed a video clip of volunteers sifting through
the wreckage for human remains. What they did find couldn’t be identified.
It seemed that the Sixers had also planted a large amount of drugmanufacturing equipment and chemicals at the scene, to make it look like a meth
lab in one of the trailers had exploded. It worked like a charm. The cops didn’t
bother to investigate any further. The stacks were so dense around the pile of
crushed and charred trailers that it was too dangerous to try to clear them out
with one of the old construction cranes. They just left the wreckage where it was,
to slowly rust into the earth.
As soon as the first endorsement payment arrived in my account, I bought a
one-way bus ticket to Columbus, Ohio, set to depart at eight the following
morning. I paid extra for a first-class seat, which came with a comfier chair and
a high-bandwidth uplink jack. I planned to spend most of the long ride east
logged into the OASIS.
Once my trip was booked, I inventoried everything in my hideout and packed
the items I wanted to take with me into an old rucksack. My school-issued
OASIS console, visor, and gloves. My dog-eared printout of Anorak’s Almanac.
My grail diary. Some clothes. My laptop. Everything else I left behind.
When it got dark, I climbed out of the van, locked it, and hurled the keys off
into the junk pile. Then I hoisted the rucksack and walked out of the stacks for

the last time. I didn’t look back.
I kept to busy streets and managed to avoid getting mugged on the way to the
bus terminal. A battered customer-service kiosk stood just inside the door, and
after a quick retinal scan it spat out my ticket. I sat by the gate, reading my copy
of the Almanac, until it was time to board the bus.
It was a double-decker, with armor plating, bulletproof windows, and solar
panels on the roof. A rolling fortress. I had a window seat, two rows behind the
driver, who was encased in a bulletproof Plexiglas box. A team of six heavily
armed guards rode on the bus’s upper deck, to protect the vehicle and its
passengers in the event of a hijacking by road agents or scavengers—a distinct
possibility once we ventured out into the lawless badlands that now existed
outside of the safety of large cities.
Every single seat on the bus was occupied. Most of the passengers put on their
visors the moment they sat down. I left mine off for a while, though. Long
enough to watch the city of my birth recede from view on the road behind us as
we rolled through the sea of wind turbines that surrounded it.
The bus’s electric motor had a top speed of about forty miles an hour, but due
to the deteriorating interstate highway system and the countless stops the bus had
to make at charging stations along the way, it took several days for me to reach
my destination. I spent nearly all of that time logged into the OASIS, preparing
to start my new life.
The first order of business was to create a new identity. This wasn’t that
difficult, now that I had some money. In the OASIS, you could buy almost any
kind of information if you knew where to look and who to ask, and if you didn’t
mind breaking the law. There were plenty of desperate and corrupt people
working for the government (and for every major corporation), and these people
often sold information on the OASIS black market.
My new status as a world-famous gunter gave me all kinds of underworld
credibility, which helped me get access to a highly exclusive illegal data-auction
site known as the L33t Hax0rz Warezhaus, and for a shockingly small amount of
money, I was able to purchase a series of access procedures and passwords for
the USCR (United States Citizen Registry) database. Using these, I was able to
log into the database and access my existing citizen profile, which had been
created when I enrolled for school. I deleted my fingerprints and retinal patterns,
then replaced them with those of someone deceased (my father). Then I copied
my own fingerprints and retinal patterns into a completely new identity profile
that I’d created, under the name Bryce Lynch. I made Bryce twenty-two years
old and gave him a brand-new Social Security number, an immaculate credit
rating, and a bachelor’s degree in Computer Science. When I wanted to become

my old self again, all I had to do was delete the Lynch identity and copy my
prints and retinal patterns back over to my original file.
Once my new identity was set up, I began searching the Columbus classifieds
for a suitable apartment and found a relatively inexpensive room in an old highrise hotel, a relic from the days when people physically traveled for business and
pleasure. The rooms had all been converted into one-room efficiency apartments,
and each unit had been modified to meet the very specific needs of a full-time
gunter. It had everything I wanted. Low rent, a high-end security system, and
steady, reliable access to as much electricity as I could afford. Most important, it
offered a direct fiber-optic connection to the main OASIS server vault, which
was located just a few miles away. This was the fastest and most secure type of
Internet connection available, and since it wasn’t provided by IOI or one of its
subsidiaries, I wouldn’t have to be paranoid about them monitoring my
connection or trying to trace my location. I would be safe.
I spoke with a rental agent in a chat room, and he showed me around a virtual
mock-up of my new digs. The place looked perfect. I rented the room under my
new name and paid six months’ rent up front. That kept the agent from asking
any questions.

Sometimes, during the late hours of the night, as the bus slowly hummed along
the crumbling highway, I removed my visor and stared out the window. I’d never
been outside of Oklahoma City before, and I was curious to see what the rest of
the country looked like. But the view was perpetually bleak, and each decaying,
overcrowded city we rolled through looked just like the last.
Finally, after it felt like we’d been crawling along the highway for months, the
Columbus skyline appeared on the horizon, glittering like Oz at the end of the
yellow brick road. We arrived around sunset, and already there were more
electric lights burning in the city than I’d ever seen at one time. I’d read that
giant solar arrays were positioned throughout the city, along with two heliostat
power plants on its outskirts. They drank in the sun’s power all day, stored it, and
fed it back out each night.
As we pulled into the Columbus bus terminal, my OASIS connection cut out.
As I pulled off my visor and filed off the bus with the other passengers, the
reality of my situation finally began to hit home. I was now a fugitive, living
under an assumed name. Powerful people were out looking for me. People who
wanted me dead.
As I stepped off the bus, I suddenly felt as though a heavy weight were resting
on my chest. I was having a hard time breathing. Maybe I was having a panic

attack. I forced myself to take deep breaths and tried to calm down. All I had to
do was to get to my new apartment, set up my rig, and log back into the OASIS.
Then everything would be all right. I would be back in familiar surroundings. I
would be safe.
I hailed an autocab and entered my new address on the touchscreen. The
synthesized voice of the cab’s computer told me the drive would take an
estimated thirty-two minutes with the current traffic conditions. During the ride,
I stared out the window at the dark city streets. I still felt light-headed and
anxious. I kept glancing at the meter to see how much farther we had to go.
Finally, the cab pulled up in front of my new apartment building, a slate-gray
monolith on the banks of the Scioto, just at the edge of the Twin Rivers ghetto. I
noticed a discolored outline on the building’s façade where the Hilton logo used
to be, back when the place had been a hotel.
I thumbed my fare and climbed out of the cab. Then I took one last look
around, inhaled one final breath of fresh air, and carried my bag through the
front door and into the lobby. When I stepped inside the security checkpoint
cage, my fingerprints and retinal patterns were scanned, and my new name
flashed on the monitor. A green light lit up and the cage door slid open, allowing
me to continue on to the elevators.
My apartment was on the forty-second floor, number 4211. The security lock
mounted outside required another retinal scan. Then the door slid open and the
interior lights switched on. There was no furniture in the cube-shaped room, and
only one window. I stepped inside, closed the door, and locked it behind me.
Then I made a silent vow not to go outside again until I had completed my quest.
I would abandon the real world altogether until I found the egg.

I’m not crazy about reality, but it’s still the only place to get a decent
meal.
—Groucho Marx

Art3mis: You there?
Parzival: Yes! Hey! I can’t believe you finally responded to one of my chat
requests.
Art3mis: Only to ask you to cut it out. It’s a bad idea for us to start chatting.
Parzival: Why? I thought we were friends.
Art3mis: You seem like a great guy. But we’re competitors. Rival gunters.
Sworn enemies. You know the drill.
Parzival: We don’t have to talk about anything related to the Hunt.…
Art3mis: Everything is related to the Hunt.
Parzival: Come on. At least give it at shot. Let’s start over. Hi, Art3mis!
How have you been?
Art3mis: Fine. Thanks for asking. You?
Parzival: Outstanding. Listen, why are we using this ancient text-only chat
interface? I can host a virtual chat room for us.
Art3mis: I prefer this.
Parzival: Why?
Art3mis: As you may recall, I tend to ramble in real time. When I have to
type out everything I want to say, I come off as less of a flibbertigibbet.
Parzival: I don’t think you’re a flibbertigibbet. You’re enchanting.
Art3mis: Did you just use the word “enchanting”?
Parzival: What I typed is right there in front of you, isn’t it?
Art3mis: That’s very sweet. But you’re full of crap.
Parzival: I am totally and completely serious.
Art3mis: So, how’s life at the top of the Scoreboard, hotshot? Sick of being
famous yet?
Parzival: I don’t feel famous.
Art3mis: Are you kidding? The whole world is dying to find out who you
really are. You’re a rock star, man.

Parzival: You’re just as famous as I am. And if I’m such a rock star, how
come the media always portrays me as some unwashed geek who never
goes outside?
Art3mis: I take it you saw that SNL skit they did about us?
Parzival: Yes. Why does everyone assume I’m an antisocial nut job?
Art3mis: You’re not antisocial?
Parzival: No! Maybe. OK, yes. But I have excellent personal hygiene.
Art3mis: At least they got your gender correct. Everyone thinks I’m a man
in real life.
Parzival: That’s because most gunters are male, and they can’t accept the
idea that a woman has beaten and/or outsmarted them.
Art3mis: I know. Neanderthals.
Parzival: So you’re telling me, definitively, that you are a female? IRL?
Art3mis: You should have already figured that out on your own, Clouseau.
Parzival: I did. I have.
Art3mis: Have you?
Parzival: Yes. After analyzing the available data, I’ve concluded that you
must be a female.
Art3mis: Why must I?
Parzival: Because I don’t want to find out that I’ve got a crush on some 300
lb. dude named Chuck who lives in his mother’s basement in suburban
Detroit.
Art3mis: You’ve got a crush on me?
Parzival: You should have already figured that out on your own, Clouseau.
Art3mis: What if I were a 300 lb. gal named Charlene, who lives in her
mom’s basement in suburban Detroit? Would you still have a crush on
me then?
Parzival: I don’t know. Do you live in your mother’s basement?
Art3mis: No.
Parzival: Yeah. Then I probably still would.
Art3mis: So I’m supposed to believe you’re one of those mythical guys
who only cares about a woman’s personality, and not about the package it
comes in?
Parzival: Why is it that you assume I’m a man?
Art3mis: Please. It’s obvious. I get nothing but boy-vibes coming from you.
Parzival: Boy-vibes? What, do I use masculine sentence structure or
something?
Art3mis: Don’t change the subject. You were saying you have a crush on
me?

Parzival: I’ve had a crush on you since before we even met. From reading
your blog and watching your POV. I’ve been cyber-stalking you for
years.
Art3mis: But you still don’t really know anything about me. Or my real
personality.
Parzival: This is the OASIS. We exist as nothing but raw personality in
here.
Art3mis: I beg to differ. Everything about our online personas is filtered
through our avatars, which allows us to control how we look and sound
to others. The OASIS lets you be whoever you want to be. That’s why
everyone is addicted to it.
Parzival: So, IRL, you’re nothing like the person I met that night in the
tomb?
Art3mis: That was just one side of me. The side I chose to show you.
Parzival: Well, I liked that side. And if you showed me your other sides,
I’m sure I’d like those, too.
Art3mis: You say that now. But I know how these things work. Sooner or
later, you’ll demand to see a picture of the real me.
Parzival: I’m not the sort who makes demands. Besides, I’m definitely not
going to show you a photo of me.
Art3mis: Why? Are you butt ugly?
Parzival: You’re such a hypocrite!
Art3mis: So? Answer the question, Claire. Are you ugly?
Parzival: I must be.
Art3mis: Why?
Parzival: The female of the species has always found me repellent.
Art3mis: I don’t find you repellent.
Parzival: Of course not. That’s because you’re an obese man named Chuck
who likes to chat up ugly young boys online.
Art3mis: So you’re a young man?
Parzival: Relatively young.
Art3mis: Relative to what?
Parzival: To a fifty-three-year-old guy like you, Chuck. Does your mom let
you live in that basement rent-free or what?
Art3mis: Is that really what you’re picturing?
Parzival: If it were, I wouldn’t be chatting with you right now.
Art3mis: So what do you imagine I look like, then?
Parzival: Like your avatar, I suppose. Except, you know, without the armor,
guns, or glowing sword.

Art3mis: You’re kidding, right? That’s the first rule of online romances, pal.
No one ever looks anything like their avatar.
Parzival: Are we going to have an online romance? <crosses fingers>
Art3mis: No way, ace. Sorry.
Parzival: Why not?
Art3mis: No time for love, Dr. Jones. My cyber-porn addiction eats up most
of my free time. And searching for the Jade Key takes up the rest. That’s
what I should be doing right now, in fact.
Parzival: Yeah. So should I. But talking to you is more fun.
Art3mis: How about you?
Parzival: How about me what?
Art3mis: Do you have time for an online romance?
Parzival: I’ve got time for you.
Art3mis: You’re too much.
Parzival: I’m not even laying it on thick yet.
Art3mis: Do you have a job? Or are you still in high school?
Parzival: High school. I graduate next week.
Art3mis: You shouldn’t reveal stuff like that! I could be a Sixer spy trying
to profile you.
Parzival: The Sixers already profiled me, remember? They blew up my
house. Well, it was a trailer. But they blew it up.
Art3mis: I know. I’m still freaked out about that. I can only imagine how
you feel.
Parzival: Revenge is a dish best served cold.
Art3mis: Bon appetit. What do you do when you’re not hunting?
Parzival: I refuse to answer any more questions until you start
reciprocating.
Art3mis: Fine. Quid pro quo, Dr. Lecter. We’ll take turns asking questions.
Go ahead.
Parzival: Do you work, or go to school?
Art3mis: College.
Parzival: Studying what?
Art3mis: It’s my turn. What do you do when you’re not hunting?
Parzival: Nothing. Hunting is all I do. I’m hunting right now, in fact.
Multitasking all over the goddamn place.
Art3mis: Same here.
Parzival: Really? I’ll keep an eye on the Scoreboard then. Just in case.
Art3mis: You do that, ace.
Parzival: What are you studying? In college?

Art3mis: Poetry and Creative Writing.
Parzival: That makes sense. You’re a fantastic writer.
Art3mis: Thanks for the compliment. How old are you?
Parzival: Just turned 18 last month. You?
Art3mis: Don’t you think we’re getting a little too personal now?
Parzival: Not even remotely.
Art3mis: 19.
Parzival: Ah. An older woman. Hot.
Art3mis: That is, if I am a woman …
Parzival: Are you a woman?
Art3mis: It’s not your turn.
Parzival: Fine.
Art3mis: How well do you know Aech?
Parzival: He’s been my best friend for five years. Now, spill it. Are you a
woman? And by that I mean are you a human female who has never had
a sex-change operation?
Art3mis: That’s pretty specific.
Parzival: Answer the question, Claire.
Art3mis: I am, and always have been, a human female. Have you ever met
Aech IRL?
Parzival: No. Do you have any siblings?
Art3mis: No. You?
Parzival: Nope. You got parents?
Art3mis: They died. The flu. So I was raised by my grandparents. You got
parentage?
Parzival: No. Mine are dead too.
Art3mis: It kinda sucks, doesn’t it? Not having your parents around.
Parzival: Yeah. But a lot of people are worse off than me.
Art3mis: I tell myself that all the time. So … are you and Aech working as
a duo?
Parzival: Oh, here we go.…
Art3mis: Well? Are you?
Parzival: No. He asked me the same thing about you and me, you know.
Because you cleared the First Gate a few hours after I did.
Art3mis: Which reminds me—why did you give me that tip? About
changing sides on the Joust game?
Parzival: I felt like helping you.
Art3mis: Well, you shouldn’t make that mistake again. Because I’m the one
who’s going to win. You do realize that, right?

Parzival: Yeah, yeah. We’ll see.
Art3mis: You’re not holding up your end of our Q & A, goof. You’re, like,
five questions behind.
Parzival: Fine. What color is your hair? IRL?
Art3mis: Brunette.
Parzival: Eyes?
Art3mis: Blue.
Parzival: Just like your avatar, eh? Do you have the same face and body,
too?
Art3mis: As far as you know.
Parzival: OK. What’s your favorite movie? Of all time?
Art3mis: It changes. Right now? Probably Highlander.
Parzival: You’ve got great taste, lady.
Art3mis: I know. I have a thing for evil bald bad guys. The Kurgan is too
sexy.
Parzival: I’m going to shave my head right now. And start wearing leather.
Art3mis: Send photos. Listen, I gotta go in a few minutes, Romeo. You can
ask me one last question. Then I need to get some sleep.
Parzival: When can we chat again?
Art3mis: After one of us finds the egg.
Parzival: That could take years.
Art3mis: So be it.
Parzival: Can I at least keep e-mailing you?
Art3mis: Not a good idea.
Parzival: You can’t stop me from e-mailing you.
Art3mis: Actually, I can. I can block you on my contact list.
Parzival: You wouldn’t do that, though. Would you?
Art3mis: Not if you don’t force me to.
Parzival: Harsh. Unnecessarily harsh.
Art3mis: Good night, Parzival.
Parzival: Farewell, Art3mis. Sweet dreams.
chatlog ends. 2.27.2045–02:51:38 OST

I started e-mailing her. At first I showed restraint and only wrote her once a
week. To my surprise, she never failed to respond. Usually it was with just a
single sentence, saying she was too busy to reply. But her replies eventually got
longer and we began to correspond. A few times a week at first. Then, as our e-

mails grew longer and more personal, we started writing each other at least once
a day. Sometimes more. Whenever an e-mail from her arrived in my inbox, I
dropped everything to read it.
Before long, we were meeting in private chat-room sessions at least once a
day. We played vintage board games, watched movies, and listened to music. We
talked for hours. Long, rambling conversations about everything under the sun.
Spending time with her was intoxicating. We seemed to have everything in
common. We shared the same interests. We were driven by the same goal. She
got all of my jokes. She made me laugh. She made me think. She changed the
way I saw the world. I’d never had such a powerful, immediate connection with
another human being before. Not even with Aech.
I no longer cared that we were supposed to be rivals, and she didn’t seem to
either. We began to share details about our research. We told each other what
movies we were currently watching and what books we were reading. We even
began to exchange theories and to discuss our interpretations of specific
passages in the Almanac. I couldn’t make myself be cautious around her. A little
voice in my head kept trying to tell me that every word she said could be
disinformation and that she might just be playing me for a fool. But I didn’t
believe it. I trusted her, even though I had every reason not to.
I graduated from high school in early June. I didn’t attend the graduation
ceremony. I’d stopped attending classes altogether when I fled the stacks. As far
as I knew, the Sixers thought I was dead, and I didn’t want to tip them off by
showing up for my last few weeks of school. Missing finals week wasn’t a big
deal, since I already had more than enough credits to receive my diploma. The
school e-mailed a copy of it to me. They snail-mailed the actual diploma to my
address in the stacks, which no longer existed, so I don’t know what became of
it.
When I finished school, I’d intended to devote all of my time to the Hunt. But
all I really wanted to do was spend time with Art3mis.

When I wasn’t hanging out with my new online pseudo-girlfriend, I devoted the
rest of my time to leveling up my avatar. Gunters called this “making the climb
to ninety-nine,” because ninety-ninth level was the maximum power level an
avatar could attain. Art3mis and Aech had both recently done it, and I felt
compelled to catch up. It actually didn’t take me very long. I now had nothing
but free time, and I had the money and the means to fully explore the OASIS. So
I began to complete every quest I could find, sometimes jumping five or six
levels in one day. I became a split-class Warrior/Mage. As my stats continued to

increase, I honed my avatar’s combat and spell-casting abilities while collecting
a wide array of powerful weapons, magic items, and vehicles.
Art3mis and I even teamed up for a few quests. We visited the planet
Goondocks and finished the entire Goonies quest in just one day. Arty played
through it as Martha Plimpton’s character, Stef, while I played as Mikey, Sean
Astin’s character. It was entirely too much fun.
I didn’t spend all of my time goofing off. I tried to keep my head in the game.
Really I did. At least once a day, I would pull up the Quatrain and try once again
to decipher its meaning.
The captain conceals the Jade Key
in a dwelling long neglected
But you can only blow the whistle
once the trophies are all collected
For a while, I thought that the whistle in the third line might be a reference to
a late-’60s Japanese TV show called The Space Giants, which had been dubbed
in English and rebroadcast in the United States in the ’70s and ’80s. The Space
Giants (called Maguma Taishi in Japan) featured a family of transforming robots
who lived in a volcano and battled an evil alien villain named Rodak. Halliday
referred to this show several times in Anorak’s Almanac, citing it as one of his
childhood favorites. One of the show’s main characters was a boy named Miko,
who would blow a special whistle to summon the robots to his aid. I watched all
fifty-two ultra-cheesy episodes of The Space Giants, back-to-back, while
wolfing down corn chips and taking notes. But when the viewing marathon was
over, I still wasn’t any closer to understanding the Quatrain’s meaning. I’d hit
another dead end. I decided that Halliday must be referring to some other
whistle.
Then, one Saturday morning, I finally made a small breakthrough. I was
watching a collection of vintage ’80s cereal commercials when I paused to
wonder why cereal manufacturers no longer included toy prizes inside every
box. It was a tragedy, in my opinion. Another sign that civilization was going
straight down the tubes. I was still pondering this when an old Cap’n Crunch
commercial came on, and that was when I made a connection between the first
and third lines of the Quatrain: The captain conceals the Jade Key … But you
can only blow the whistle …
Halliday was alluding to a famous ’70s hacker named John Draper, better
known by the alias Captain Crunch. Draper was one of the first phone phreaks,
and he was famous for discovering that the toy plastic whistles found as prizes in

boxes of Cap’n Crunch cereal could be used to make free long-distance phone
calls, because they emitted a 2600-hertz tone that tricked the old analog phone
system into giving you free access to the line.
The captain conceals the Jade Key
That had to be it. “The captain” was Cap’n Crunch, and “the whistle” was the
famous toy plastic whistle of phone phreak lore.
Maybe the Jade Key was disguised as one of those toy plastic whistles, and it
was hidden in a box of Cap’n Crunch cereal.… But where was that cereal box
hidden?
In a dwelling long neglected
I still didn’t know what long-neglected dwelling that line referred to, or where
to look for it. I visited every neglected dwelling I could think of. Re-creations of
the Addams Family house, the abandoned shack in the Evil Dead trilogy, Tyler
Durden’s flophouse in Fight Club, and the Lars Homestead on Tattooine. No
luck finding the Jade Key inside any of them. Dead end after dead end.
But you can only blow the whistle
Once the trophies are all collected
I still hadn’t deciphered the meaning of that last line, either. What trophies did
I have to collect? Or was that some kind of half-assed metaphor? There had to be
a simple connection I wasn’t making, a sly reference that I still wasn’t clever or
knowledgeable enough to catch.
Since then, I’d failed to make any more progress. Every time I revisited the
Quatrain, my ongoing infatuation with Art3mis would undermine my ability to
focus, and before long I would close my grail diary and call her up to see if she
wanted to hang out. She almost always did.
I convinced myself that it was all right to slack off a bit, because no one else
seemed to be making any progress in their search for the Jade Key. The
Scoreboard remained unchanged. Everyone else seemed to be just as stumped as
I was.

As the weeks continued to pass, Art3mis and I spent more and more time
together. Even when our avatars were doing other things, we were sending emails and instant messages to each other. A river of words flowed between us.
I wanted more than anything to meet her in the real world. Face-to-face. But I
didn’t tell her this. I was certain she had strong feelings for me, but she also kept
me at a distance. No matter how much I revealed about myself to her—and I

wound up revealing just about everything, including my real name—she always
adamantly refused to reveal any details about her own life. All I knew was that
she was nineteen and that she lived somewhere in the Pacific Northwest. That
was all she would tell me.
The image of her that formed in my mind was the most obvious one. I
pictured her as a physical manifestation of her avatar. I imagined her with the
same face, eyes, hair, and body. Even though she told me repeatedly that in
reality she looked almost nothing like her avatar and that she wasn’t nearly as
attractive in person.
When I began to spend most of my time with Art3mis, Aech and I began to
grow apart. Instead of hanging out several times a week, we chatted a few times
a month. Aech knew I was falling for Art3mis, but he never gave me too much
grief about it, even when I would bail on him at the last minute to hang out with
her instead. He would just shrug, tell me to be careful, and say, “I sure hope you
know what you’re doing, Z.”
I didn’t, of course. My whole relationship with Art3mis was in defiance of all
common sense. But I couldn’t help falling for her. Somehow, without my
realizing it, my obsession with finding Halliday’s Easter egg was gradually being
supplanted by my obsession with Art3mis.
Eventually, she and I began to go out on “dates,” taking day trips to exotic
OASIS locales and exclusive night spots. At first, Art3mis protested. She
thought I should keep a low profile, because as soon as my avatar was spotted in
public, the Sixers would know that their attempt to kill me had failed, and I’d be
back on their hit list. But I told her I no longer cared. I was already hiding from
the Sixers in the real world, and I refused to continue hiding from them in the
OASIS, too. Besides, I had a ninety-ninth-level avatar now. I felt nigh invincible.
Maybe I was just trying to impress Art3mis by acting fearless. If so, I think it
worked.
We still disguised our avatars before we went out, because we knew there
would be tabloid headlines galore if Parzival and Art3mis started showing up in
public together on a regular basis. But there was one exception. One night, she
took me to see the Rocky Horror Picture Show in a huge stadium-sized movie
theater on the planet Transsexual, where they held the most highly attended and
longest-running weekly screening of the movie in the OASIS. Thousands of
avatars came to every show, to sit in the stands and revel in the audience
participation. Normally, only longstanding members of the Rocky Horror Fan
Club were permitted to get up onstage and help act out the film in front of the
giant movie screen, and only after they’d passed a grueling audition process. But
Art3mis used her fame to pull a few strings, and she and I were both allowed to

join the cast for that night’s show. The whole planet was in a no-PvP zone, so I
wasn’t worried about getting ambushed by the Sixers. But I did have a serious
case of stage fright when the show began.
Art3mis played a note-perfect Columbia, and I had the honor of playing her
undead love interest, Eddie. I altered my avatar’s appearance so that I looked
exactly like Meat Loaf did in the role, but my performance and lip-synching still
kinda sucked. Luckily, the audience cut me a lot of slack, because I was the
famous gunter Parzival, and I was clearly having a blast.
That night was easily the most fun I’d ever had in my life up to that point. I
told Art3mis so afterward, and that was when she leaned over and kissed me for
the first time. I couldn’t feel it, of course. But it still set my heart racing.
I’d heard all the clichéd warnings about the perils of falling for someone you
only knew online, but I ignored them. I decided that whoever Art3mis really
was, I was in love with her. I could feel it, deep in the soft, chewy caramel center
of my being.
And then one night, like a complete idiot, I told her how I felt.

It was a Friday night, and I was spending another solitary evening doing
research, working my way through every episode of Whiz Kids, an early-’80s TV
show about a teenage hacker who uses his computer skills to solve mysteries. I’d
just finished watching the episode “Deadly Access” (a crossover with Simon &
Simon) when an e-mail arrived in my inbox. It was from Ogden Morrow. The
subject line read “We Can Dance If We Want To.”
There was no text in the body of the e-mail. Just a file attachment—an
invitation to one of the most exclusive gatherings in the OASIS: Ogden
Morrow’s birthday party. In the real world, Morrow almost never made public
appearances, and in the OASIS, he came out of hiding only once a year, to host
this event.
The invitation featured a photo of Morrow’s world-famous avatar, the Great
and Powerful Og. The gray-bearded wizard was hunched over an elaborate DJ
mixing board, one headphone pressed to his ear, biting his lower lip in auditory
ecstasy as his fingers scratched ancient vinyl on a set of silver turntables. His
record crate bore a DON’T PANIC sticker and an anti-Sixer logo—a yellow number
six with a red circle-and-slash over it. The text at the bottom read
Ogden Morrow’s ’80s Dance Party
in celebration of his 73rd birthday!
Tonight—10pm OST at the Distracted Globe
ADMIT ONE
I was flabbergasted. Ogden Morrow had actually taken the time to invite me
to his birthday party. It felt like the greatest honor I’d ever received.
I called Art3mis, and she confirmed that she’d received the same e-mail. She
said she couldn’t pass up an invitation from Og himself, despite the obvious
risks. So, naturally, I told her I would meet her there at the club. It was the only
way I could avoid looking like a total wuss.

I knew that if Og had invited the two of us, he’d probably also invited the
other members of the High Five. But Aech probably wouldn’t show up, because
he competed in a globally televised arena deathmatch every Friday night. And
Shoto and Daito never entered a PvP zone unless it was absolutely necessary.
The Distracted Globe was a famous zero-gravity dance club on the planet
Neonoir in Sector Sixteen. Ogden Morrow had coded the place himself decades
ago and was still its sole owner. I’d never visited the Globe before. I wasn’t
much for dancing, or for socializing with the twinked-out wannabe-gunter
überdorks who were known to frequent the place. But Og’s birthday party was a
special event, and so the usual clientele would be banished for the evening.
Tonight, the club would be packed with celebrities—movie stars, musicians, and
at least two members of the High Five.
I spent over an hour tweaking my avatar’s hair and trying on different skins to
wear to the club. I finally settled on some classic ’80s-era attire: a light gray suit,
exactly like the one Peter Weller wore in Buckaroo Banzai, complete with a red
bow tie, along with a pair of vintage white Adidas high-tops. I also loaded my
inventory with my best suit of body armor and a large amount of weaponry. One
of the reasons the Globe was such a hip, exclusive club was because it was
located in a PvP zone, one where both magic and technology functioned. So it
was extremely dangerous to go there. Especially for a famous gunter like me.
There were hundreds of cyberpunk-themed worlds spread throughout the
OASIS, but Neonoir was one of the largest and oldest. Seen from orbit, the
planet was a shiny onyx marble covered in overlapping spider-webs of pulsating
light. It was always night on Neonoir, the world over, and its surface was an
uninterrupted grid of interconnected cities packed with impossibly large
skyscrapers. Its skies were filled with a continuous stream of flying vehicles
whirring through the vertical cityscapes, and the streets below teemed with
leather-clad NPCs and mirror-shaded avatars, all sporting high-tech weaponry
and subcutaneous implants as they spouted city-speak straight out of
Neuromancer.
The Distracted Globe was located at the western-hemisphere intersection of
the Boulevard and the Avenue, two brightly lit streets that stretched completely
around the planet along its equator and prime meridian. The club itself was a
massive cobalt blue sphere, three kilometers in diameter, floating thirty meters
off the ground. A floating crystal staircase led up to the club’s only entrance, a
circular opening at the bottom of the sphere.
I made a big entrance when I arrived in my flying DeLorean, which I’d
obtained by completing a Back to the Future quest on the planet Zemeckis. The
DeLorean came outfitted with a (nonfunctioning) flux capacitor, but I’d made

several additions to its equipment and appearance. First, I’d installed an
artificially intelligent onboard computer named KITT (purchased in an online
auction) into the dashboard, along with a matching red Knight Rider scanner just
above the DeLorean’s grill. Then I’d outfitted the car with an oscillation
overthruster, a device that allowed it to travel through solid matter. Finally, to
complete my ’80s super-vehicle theme, I’d slapped a Ghostbusters logo on each
of the DeLorean’s gull-wing doors, then added personalized plates that read
ECTO-88.
I’d had it only a few weeks now, but my time-traveling, Ghost Busting,
Knight Riding, matter-penetrating DeLorean had already become my avatar’s
trademark.
I knew that leaving my sweet ride parked in a PvP zone was an open invitation
for some moron to try to boost it. The DeLorean had several antitheft systems
installed, and the ignition system was booby-trapped Max Rockatansky–style so
that if any other avatar tried to start the car, the plutonium chamber would
detonate in a small thermonuclear explosion. But keeping my car safe wouldn’t
be a problem here on Neonoir. As soon as I climbed out of the DeLorean I cast a
Shrink spell on it, instantly reducing it to the size of a Matchbox car. Then I put
the DeLorean in my pocket. Magic zones had their advantages.
Thousands of avatars were packed up against the velvet rope force fields that
kept everyone without an invitation at bay. As I walked toward the entrance, the
crowd bombarded me with a mix of insults, autograph requests, death threats,
and tearful declarations of undying love. I had my body shield activated, but
surprisingly, no one took a shot at me. I flashed the cyborg doorman my
invitation, then mounted the long crystal staircase leading up into the club.
Entering the Distracted Globe was more than a little disorienting. The inside
of the giant sphere was completely hollow, and its curved interior surface served
as the club’s bar and lounge area. The moment you passed through the entrance,
the laws of gravity changed. No matter where you walked, your avatar’s feet
always adhered to the interior of the sphere, so you could walk in a straight line,
up to the “top” of the club, then back down the other side, ending up right back
where you started. The huge open space in the center of the sphere served as the
club’s zero-gravity “dance floor.” You reached it simply by jumping off the
ground, like Superman taking flight, and then swimming through the air, into the
spherical zero-g “groove zone.”
As I stepped through the entrance, I glanced up—or in the direction that was
currently “up” to me at the moment—and took a long look around. The place
was packed. Hundreds of avatars milled around like ants crawling around the
inside of a giant balloon. Others were already out on the dance floor—spinning,

flying, twisting, and tumbling in time with the music, which thumped out of
floating spherical speakers that drifted throughout the club.
In the middle of all the dancers, a large clear bubble was suspended in space,
at the absolute center of the club. This was the “booth” where the DJ stood,
surrounded by turntables, mixers, decks, and dials. At the center of all that gear
was the opening DJ, R2-D2, hard at work, using his various robotic arms to
work the turntables. I recognized the tune he was playing: the ’88 remix of New
Order’s “Blue Monday,” with a lot of Star Wars droid sound samples mixed in.
As I made my way to the nearest bar, the avatars I passed all stopped to stare
and point in my direction. I didn’t pay them much notice, because I was busy
scanning the club for Art3mis.
When I reached the bar, I ordered a Pan-Galactic Gargle Blaster from the
female Klingon bartender and downed half of it. Then I grinned as R2 cued up
another classic ’80s tune. “ ‘Union of the Snake,’ ” I recited, mostly out of habit.
“Duran Duran. Nineteen eighty-three.”
“Not bad, ace,” said a familiar voice, speaking just loud enough to be heard
over the music. I turned to see Art3mis standing behind me. She was wearing
evening attire: a gunmetal blue dress that looked like it was spray-painted on.
Her avatar’s dark hair was styled in a pageboy cut, perfectly framing her
gorgeous face. She looked devastating.
She shouted at the barkeep. “Glenmorangie. On the rocks.”
I smiled to myself. Connor MacLeod’s favorite drink. Man, did I love this girl.
She winked at me as her drink appeared. Then she clinked her glass against
mine and downed its contents in one swallow. The chattering of the avatars
around us grew in volume. Word that Parzival and Art3mis were here, chatting
each other up at the bar, was already spreading through the entire club.
Art3mis glanced up at the dance floor, then back at me. “So how about it,
Percy?” she said. “Feel like cutting a rug?”
I scowled. “Not if you keep calling me ‘Percy.’ ”
She laughed. Just then, the current song ended, and the club grew silent. All
eyes turned upward, toward the DJ booth, where R2-D2 was currently dissolving
in a shower of light, like someone “beaming out” in an original Star Trek
episode. Then a huge cheer went up as a familiar gray-haired avatar beamed in,
appearing behind the turntables. It was Og.
Hundreds of vidfeed windows materialized in the air, all over the club. Each
displayed a live close-up image of Og in the booth, so that everyone could see
his avatar clearly. The old wizard was wearing baggy jeans, sandals, and a faded
Star Trek: The Next Generation T-shirt. He waved to the assembled, then cued
up his first track, a dance remix of “Rebel Yell” by Billy Idol.

A cheer swept across the dance floor.
“I love this song!” Art3mis shouted. Her eyes darted up to the dance floor. I
looked at her uncertainly. “What’s wrong?” she said with mock sympathy.
“Can’t the boy dance?”
She abruptly locked into the beat, bobbing her head, gyrating her hips. Then
she pushed off from the floor with both feet and began to float upward, drifting
toward the groove zone. I stared up at her, temporarily frozen, mustering my
courage.
“All right,” I muttered to myself. “What the hell.”
I bent my knees and pushed off hard from the floor. My avatar took flight,
drifting upward and sliding alongside Art3mis. The avatars who were already on
the dance floor moved aside to clear a path for us, a tunnel leading to the center
of the dance floor. I could see Og hovering in his bubble, just a short distance
above us. He was spinning around like a dervish, remixing the song on the fly
while simultaneously adjusting the gravity vortex of the dance floor, so that he
was actually spinning the club itself, like an ancient vinyl disc.
Art3mis winked at me, and then her legs melted together to form a mermaid’s
tail. She flapped her new tail fin once and shot ahead of me, her body undulating
and thrusting in time with the machine-gun beat as she swam through the air.
Then she spun back around to face me, suspended and floating, smiling and
holding out her hand, beckoning me to join her. Her hair floated in a halo around
her head, like she was underwater.
When I reached her, she took my hand. As she did, her mermaid tail vanished
and her legs reappeared, whirling and scissoring to the beat.
Not trusting my instincts any further, I loaded up a piece of high-end avatar
dance software called Travoltra, which I’d downloaded and tested earlier that
evening. The program took control of Parzival’s movements, synching them up
with the music, and all four of my limbs were transformed into undulating cosine
waves. Just like that, I became a dancing fool.
Art3mis’s eyes lit up in surprise and delight, and she began to mirror my
movements, the two of us orbiting each other like accelerated electrons. Then
Art3mis began shape-shifting.
Her avatar lost its human form and dissolved into a pulsing amorphous blob
that changed its size and color in synch with the music. I selected the mirror
partner option on my dance software and began to do the same. My avatar’s
limbs and torso began to flow and spin like taffy, encircling Art3mis, while
strange color patterns flowed and shifted across my skin. I looked like Plastic
Man, if he were tripping out of his mind on LSD. Then everyone else on the
dance floor also began to shape-shift, melting into prismatic blobs of light. Soon,

the center of the club looked like some otherworldly lava lamp.
When the song ended, Og took a bow, then queued up a slow song. “Time
After Time” by Cyndi Lauper. All around us, avatars began to pair up.
I gave Art3mis a courtly bow and stretched out my hand. She smiled and took
it. I pulled her close and we began to drift together. Og set the dance floor’s
gravity on a counterclockwise spin, making all of our avatars slowly rotate
around the club’s invisible central axis, like motes of dust floating inside a snow
globe.
And then, before I could stop myself, the words just came out.
“I’m in love with you, Arty.”
She didn’t respond at first. She just looked at me in shock as our avatars
continued to drift in orbit around each other, moving on autopilot. Then she
switched to a private voice channel, so no one could eavesdrop on our
conversation.
“You aren’t in love with me, Z,” she said. “You don’t even know me.”
“Yes I do,” I insisted. “I know you better than I’ve ever known anyone in my
entire life.”
“You only know what I want you to know. You only see what I want you to
see.” She placed a hand on her chest. “This isn’t my real body, Wade. Or my real
face.”
“I don’t care! I’m in love with your mind—with the person you are. I couldn’t
care less about the packaging.”
“You’re just saying that,” she said. There was an unsteadiness in her voice.
“Trust me. If I ever let you see me in person, you would be repulsed.”
“Why do you always say that?”
“Because I’m hideously deformed. Or I’m a paraplegic. Or I’m actually sixtythree years old. Take your pick.”
“I don’t care if you’re all three of those things. Tell me where to meet you and
I’ll prove it. I’ll get on a plane right now and fly to wherever you are. You know
I will.”
She shook her head. “You don’t live in the real world, Z. From what you’ve
told me, I don’t think you ever have. You’re like me. You live inside this
illusion.” She motioned to our virtual surroundings. “You can’t possibly know
what real love is.”
“Don’t say that!” I was starting to cry and didn’t bother hiding it from her. “Is
it because I told you I’ve never had a real girlfriend? And that I’m a virgin?
Because—”
“Of course not,” she said. “That isn’t what this is about. At all.”
“Then what is it about? Tell me. Please.”

“The Hunt. You know that. We’ve both been neglecting our quests to hang out
with each other. We should be focused on finding the Jade Key right now. You
can bet that’s what Sorrento and the Sixers are doing. And everyone else.”
“To hell with our competition! And the egg!” I shouted. “Didn’t you hear
what I just said? I’m in love with you! And I want to be with you. More than
anything.”
She just stared at me. Or rather, her avatar stared blankly back at my avatar.
Then she said, “I’m sorry, Z. This is all my fault. I let this get way out of hand. It
has to stop.”
“What do you mean? What has to stop?”
“I think we should take a break. Stop spending so much time together.”
I felt like I’d been punched in the throat. “Are you breaking up with me?”
“No, Z,” she said firmly. “I am not breaking up with you. That would be
impossible, because we are not together.” There was suddenly venom in her
voice. “We’ve never even met!”
“So then … you’re just going to … stop talking to me?”
“Yes. I think that would be for the best.”
“For how long?”
“Until the Hunt is over.”
“But, Arty … That could take years.”
“I realize that. And I’m sorry. But this is how it has to be.”
“So winning that money is more important to you than me?”
“It’s not about the money. It’s about what I could do with it.”
“Right. Saving the world. You’re so fucking noble.”
“Don’t be a jerk,” she said. “I’ve been searching for the egg for over five
years. So have you. Now we’re closer than ever to finding it. I can’t just throw
my chance away.”
“I’m not asking you to.”
“Yes, you are. Even if you don’t realize it.”
The Cyndi Lauper song ended and Og queued up another dance track
—“James Brown Is Dead” by L.A. Style. The club erupted in applause.
I felt like a large wooden stake had been driven into my chest.
Art3mis was about to say something more—good-bye, I think—when we
heard a thunderous boom directly up above us. At first, I thought it was Og,
train-wrecking into a new dance track. But then I looked up and saw the large
chunks of rubble tumbling at high speed onto the dance floor as avatars scattered
to get out of the way. A gaping hole had just been blasted in the roof of the club,
near the top of the globe. And a small army of Sixers was now pouring through
it, swooping into the club on jet packs, firing blaster pistols as they came.

Total chaos broke out. Half of the avatars in the club swarmed toward the exit,
while the other half drew weapons or began to cast spells, firing laser bolts,
bullets, and fireballs back at the invading Sixers. There were more than a
hundred of them, all armed to the teeth.
I couldn’t believe the Sixers’ bravado. Why would they be dumb enough to
attack a room full of high-level gunters, on their own turf? They might kill a few
of us, but they were going to lose some or all of their own avatars in the process.
And for what?
Then I realized that most of the Sixers’ incoming fire seemed to be directed at
me and Art3mis. They were here to kill the two of us.
The news that Art3mis and I were here must have already hit the newsfeeds.
And when Sorrento had learned that the top two gunters on the Scoreboard were
hanging out in an unshielded PvP zone, he must have decided that it was too
juicy a target to pass up. This was the Sixers’ chance to take out their two biggest
competitors in one shot. It was worth wasting a hundred or so of their highestlevel avatars.
I knew my own recklessness had brought them down on us. I cursed myself
for being so foolish. Then I drew my blasters and began to unload them at the
cluster of Sixers nearest to me while also doing my best to dodge their incoming
fire. I glanced over at Art3mis just in time to see her incinerate a dozen Sixers in
the space of five seconds, using balls of blue plasma that she hurled out of her
palms, while ignoring the steady stream of laser bolts and magic missiles
ricocheting off her transparent body shield. I was taking heavy fire too. So far
my own body shield was holding up, but it wasn’t going to last much longer.
Failure warnings were already flashing on my display, and my hit-point counter
was starting to plummet.
In seconds, the situation escalated into the largest confrontation I’d ever
witnessed. And it already seemed clear that Art3mis and I were going to be on
the losing side.
I noticed that the music still hadn’t stopped.
I glanced up at the DJ booth just in time to see it crack open as the Great and
Powerful Og emerged from within. He looked really, really annoyed.
“You jerks think you can crash my birthday party?” he shouted. His avatar was
still wearing a mic, so his words blasted over the club’s speaker array,
reverberating like the voice of God. The melee seemed to halt for a split second
as all eyes turned to look at Og, who was now floating at the center of the dance
floor. He stretched out his arms as he turned to face the onslaught of Sixers.
A dozen tines of red lightning erupted from each of Og’s fingertips, branching
out in all directions. Each tine struck a different Sixer avatar in the chest while

somehow arcing harmlessly around everyone else.
In a millisecond, every single Sixer in the club was completely vaporized.
Their avatars froze and glowed bright red for a few seconds, then simply
vanished.
I was awestruck. It was the most incredible display of power by an avatar I’d
ever seen.
“Nobody busts into my joint uninvited!” Og shouted, his voice echoing
through the now-silent club. The remaining avatars (the ones who hadn’t fled the
club in terror or been killed in the brief battle) let out a victorious cheer. Og flew
back into the DJ booth, which closed up around him like a transparent cocoon.
“Let’s get this party going again, shall we?” he said, dropping a needle on a
techno remix of “Atomic” by Blondie. It took a moment for the shock to wear
off, but then everyone started to dance again.
I looked around for Art3mis, but she seemed to have vanished. Then I spotted
her avatar flying out of the new exit the Sixer attack had created. She stopped
and hovered outside a moment, just long enough to glance back at me.

My computer woke me up just before sundown, and I began my daily ritual.
“I’m up!” I shouted at the darkness. In the weeks since Art3mis had dumped
me, I’d had a hard time getting out of bed in the morning. So I’d disabled my
alarm’s snooze feature and instructed the computer to blast “Wake Me Up
Before You Go-Go” by Wham! I loathed that song with every fiber of my being,
and getting up was the only way to silence it. It wasn’t the most pleasant way to
start my day, but it got me moving.
The song cut off, and my haptic chair reshaped and reoriented itself,
transforming from a bed back into its chair configuration, lifting me into a sitting
position as it did so. The computer began to bring the lights up slowly, allowing
my eyes to adjust. No outside light ever penetrated my apartment. The single
window had once provided a view of the Columbus skyline, but I’d spraypainted it completely black a few days after I moved in. I’d decided that
everything outside the window was a distraction from my quest, so I didn’t need
to waste time staring at it. I didn’t want to hear the outside world, either, but I
hadn’t been able to improve upon the apartment’s existing soundproofing. So I
had to live with the muffled sounds of wind and rain, and of street and air traffic.
Even these could be a distraction. At times, I’d slip into a kind of trance, sitting
with my eyes closed, oblivious to the passage of time, listening to the sounds of
the world outside my room.
I’d made several other modifications to the apartment for the sake of security
and convenience. First, I replaced the flimsy door with a new airtight armorplated vacuum-sealed WarDoor. Whenever I needed something—food, toilet
paper, new gear—I ordered it online, and someone brought it right to my door.
Deliveries worked like this: First, the scanner mounted outside in the hallway
would verify the delivery person’s identity and my computer would confirm they
were delivering something I’d actually ordered. Then the outer door would
unlock itself and slide open, revealing a steel-reinforced air lock about the size
of a shower stall. The delivery person would place the parcel, pizza, or whatever

inside the air lock and step back. The outer door would hiss shut and relock
itself; then the package would be scanned, X-rayed, and analyzed eight ways
from Wednesday. Its contents would be verified and delivery confirmation would
be sent. Then I would unlock and open the inner door and receive my goods.
Capitalism would inch forward, without my actually having to interact face-toface with another human being. Which was exactly how I preferred it, thank you.
The room itself wasn’t much to look at, which was fine, because I spent as
little time looking at it as possible. It was basically a cube, about ten meters long
on each side. A modular shower and toilet unit were embedded in one wall,
opposite the small ergonomic kitchen. I’d never actually used the kitchen to cook
anything. My meals were all frozen or delivered. Microwave brownies were as
close as I ever got to cooking.
The rest of the room was dominated by my OASIS immersion rig. I’d invested
every spare cent I had in it. Newer, faster, or more versatile components were
always being released, so I was constantly spending large chunks of my meager
income on upgrades.
The crown jewel in my rig was, of course, my customized OASIS console.
The computer that powered my world. I’d built it myself, piece by piece, inside a
modded mirror-black Odinware sphere chassis. It had a new overclocked
processor that was so fast its cycle-time bordered on pre-cognition. And the
internal hard drive had enough storage space to hold three digitized copies of
Everything in Existence.
I spent the majority of my time in my Shaptic Technologies HC5000 fully
adjustable haptic chair. It was suspended by two jointed robotic arms anchored
to my apartment’s walls and ceiling. These arms could rotate the chair on all four
axes, so when I was strapped in to it, the unit could flip, spin, or shake my body
to create the sensation that I was falling, flying, or sitting behind the wheel of a
nuclear-powered rocket sled hurtling at Mach 2 through a canyon on the fourth
moon of Altair VI.
The chair worked in conjunction with my Shaptic Bootsuit, a full-body haptic
feedback suit. It covered every inch of my body from the neck down and had
discreet openings so I could relieve myself without removing the entire thing.
The outside of the suit was covered with an elaborate exoskeleton, a network of
artificial tendons and joints that could both sense and inhibit my movements.
Built into the inside of the suit was a weblike network of miniature actuators that
made contact with my skin every few centimeters. These could be activated in
small or large groups for the purpose of tactile simulation—to make my skin feel
things that weren’t really there. They could convincingly simulate the sensation
of a tap on the shoulder, a kick to the shin, or a gunshot in the chest. (Built-in

safety software prevented my rig from actually causing me any physical harm,
so a simulated gunshot actually felt more like a weak punch.) I had an identical
backup suit hanging in the MoshWash cleaning unit in the corner of the room.
These two haptic suits made up my entire wardrobe. My old street clothes were
buried somewhere in the closet, collecting dust.
On my hands, I wore a pair of state-of-the-art Okagami IdleHands haptic
datagloves. Special tactile feedback pads covered both palms, allowing the
gloves to create the illusion that I was touching objects and surfaces that didn’t
actually exist.
My visor was a brand-new pair of Dinatro RLR-7800 WreckSpex, featuring a
top-of-the-line virtual retinal display. The visor drew the OASIS directly onto
my retinas, at the highest frame rate and resolution perceptible to the human eye.
The real world looked washed-out and blurry by comparison. The RLR-7800
was a not-yet-available-to-the-plebian-masses prototype, but I had an
endorsement deal with Dinatro, so they sent me free gear (shipped to me through
a series of remailing services, which I used to maintain my anonymity).
My AboundSound audio system consisted of an array of ultrathin speakers
mounted on the apartment’s walls, floor, and ceiling, providing 360 degrees of
perfect spatial pin-drop sound reproduction. And the Mjolnur subwoofer was
powerful enough to make my back teeth vibrate.
The Olfatrix smell tower in the corner was capable of generating over two
thousand discernible odors. A rose garden, salty ocean wind, burning cordite—
the tower could convincingly re-create them all. It also doubled as an industrialstrength air conditioner/purifier, which was primarily what I used it for. A lot of
jokers liked to code really horrific smells into their simulations, just to mess with
people who owned smell towers, so I usually left the odor generator disabled,
unless I was in a part of the OASIS where I thought being able to smell my
surroundings might prove useful.
On the floor, directly underneath my suspended haptic chair, was my Okagami
Runaround omnidirectional treadmill. (“No matter where you go, there you are”
was the manufacturer’s slogan.) The treadmill was about two meters square and
six centimeters thick. When it was activated, I could run at top speed in any
direction and never reach the edge of the platform. If I changed direction, the
treadmill would sense it, and its rolling surface would change direction to match
me, always keeping my body near the center of its platform. This model was also
equipped with built-in lifts and an amorphous surface, so that it could simulate
walking up inclines and staircases.
You could also purchase an ACHD (anatomically correct haptic doll), if you
wanted to have more “intimate” encounters inside the OASIS. ACHDs came in

male, female, and dual-sex models, and were available with a wide array of
options. Realistic latex skin. Servomotor-driven endoskeletons. Simulated
musculature. And all of the attendant appendages and orifices one would
imagine.
Driven by loneliness, curiosity, and raging teen hormones, I’d purchased a
midrange ACHD, the Shaptic ÜberBetty, a few weeks after Art3mis stopped
speaking to me. After spending several highly unproductive days inside a standalone brothel simulation called the Pleasuredome, I’d gotten rid of the doll, out
of a combination of shame and self-preservation. I’d wasted thousands of
credits, missed a whole week of work, and was on the verge of completely
abandoning my quest for the egg when I confronted the grim realization that
virtual sex, no matter how realistic, was really nothing but glorified, computerassisted masturbation. At the end of the day, I was still a virgin, all alone in a
dark room, humping a lubed-up robot. So I got rid of the ACHD and went back
to spanking the monkey the old-fashioned way.
I felt no shame about masturbating. Thanks to Anorak’s Almanac, I now
thought of it as a normal bodily function, as necessary and natural as sleeping or
eating.
AA 241:87—I would argue that masturbation is the human animal’s most
important adaptation. The very cornerstone of our technological
civilization. Our hands evolved to grip tools, all right—including our own.
You see, thinkers, inventors, and scientists are usually geeks, and geeks
have a harder time getting laid than anyone. Without the built-in sexual
release valve provided by masturbation, it’s doubtful that early humans
would have ever mastered the secrets of fire or discovered the wheel. And
you can bet that Galileo, Newton, and Einstein never would have made
their discoveries if they hadn’t first been able to clear their heads by
slapping the salami (or “knocking a few protons off the old hydrogen
atom”). The same goes for Marie Curie. Before she discovered radium, you
can be certain she first discovered the little man in the canoe.
It wasn’t one of Halliday’s more popular theories, but I liked it.
As I shuffled over to the toilet, a large flat-screen monitor mounted on the
wall switched on, and the smiling face of Max, my system agent software,
appeared on the screen. I’d programmed Max to start up a few minutes after I
turned on the lights, so I could wake up a little bit before he started jabbering to
me.
“G-g-good morning, Wade!” Max stuttered cheerily. “Rise and sh-sh-shine!”

Running system agent software was a little like having a virtual personal
assistant—one that also functioned as a voice-activated interface with your
computer. System agent software was highly configurable, with hundreds of
preprogrammed personalities to choose from. I’d programmed mine to look,
sound, and behave like Max Headroom, the (ostensibly) computer-generated star
of a late-’80s talk show, a groundbreaking cyberpunk TV series, and a slew of
Coke commercials.
“Good morning, Max,” I replied groggily.
“I think you mean good evening, Rumpelstiltskin. It’s 7:18 p.m., OASIS Stasta-standard Time, Wednesday, December thirtieth.” Max was programmed to
speak with a slight electronic stutter. In the mid-’80s, when the character of Max
Headroom was created, computers weren’t actually powerful enough to generate
a photorealistic human figure, so Max had been portrayed by an actor (the
brilliant Matt Frewer) who wore a lot of rubber makeup to make him look
computer-generated. But the version of Max now smiling at me on the monitor
was pure software, with the best simulated AI and voice-recognition subroutines
money could buy.
I’d been running a highly customized version of MaxHeadroom v3.4.1 for a
few weeks now. Before that, my system agent software had been modeled after
the actress Erin Gray (of Buck Rogers and Silver Spoons fame). But she’d
proved to be way too distracting, so I’d switched to Max. He was annoying at
times, but he also cracked me up. He did a pretty decent job of keeping me from
feeling lonesome, too.
As I stumbled into the bathroom module and emptied my bladder, Max
continued to address me from a small monitor mounted above the mirror. “Uhoh! It appears you’ve sp-sp-sprung a leak!” he said.
“Get a new joke,” I said. “Any news I should know about?”
“Just the usual. Wars, rioting, famine. Nothing that would interest you.”
“Any messages?”
He rolled his eyes. “A few. But to answer your real question, no. Art3mis still
hasn’t called or written you back, lover boy.”
“I’ve warned you. Don’t call me that, Max. You’re begging to be deleted.”
“Touchy, touchy. Honestly, Wade. When did you get so s-s-sensitive?”
“I’ll erase you, Max. I mean it. Keep it up and I’ll switch back to Wilma
Deering. Or I’ll try out the disembodied voice of Majel Barrett.”
Max made a pouty face and spun around to face the shifting digital wallpaper
behind him—currently a pattern of multicolored vector lines. Max was always
like this. Giving me grief was part of his preprogrammed personality. I actually
sort of enjoyed it, because it reminded me of hanging out with Aech. And I

really missed hanging out with Aech. A lot.
My gaze dropped to the bathroom mirror, but I didn’t much like what I saw
there, so I closed my eyes until I finished urinating. I wondered (not for the first
time) why I hadn’t painted the mirror black too, when I’d done the window.
The hour or so after I woke up was my least favorite part of each day, because
I spent it in the real world. This was when I dealt with the tedious business of
cleaning and exercising my physical body. I hated this part of the day because
everything about it contradicted my other life. My real life, inside the OASIS.
The sight of my tiny one-room apartment, my immersion rig, or my reflection in
the mirror—they all served as a harsh reminder that the world I spent my days in
was not, in fact, the real one.
“Retract chair,” I said as I stepped out of the bathroom. The haptic chair
instantly flattened itself again, then retracted so that it was flush against the wall,
clearing a large empty space in the center of the room. I pulled on my visor and
loaded up the Gym, a stand-alone simulation.
Now I was standing in a large modern fitness center lined with exercise
equipment and weight machines, all of which could be perfectly simulated by
my haptic suit. I began my daily workout. Sit-ups, stomach crunches, push-ups,
aerobics, weight training. Occasionally, Max would shout words of
encouragement. “Get those legs up, you s-s-sissy! Feel the burn!”
I usually got a little exercise while logged into the OASIS, by engaging in
physical combat or running around the virtual landscape on my treadmill. But I
spent the vast majority of my time sitting in my haptic chair, getting almost no
exercise at all. I also had a habit of overeating when I was depressed or
frustrated, which was most of the time. As a result, I’d gradually started to put
on some extra pounds. I wasn’t in the best shape to begin with, so I quickly
reached a point where I could no longer fit comfortably in my haptic chair or
squeeze in to my XL haptic suit. Soon, I would need to buy a new rig, with
components from the Husky line.
I knew that if I didn’t get my weight under control, I would probably die of
sloth before I found the egg. I couldn’t let that happen. So I made a snap
decision and enabled the voluntary OASIS fitness lockout software on my rig.
I’d regretted it almost immediately.
From then on, my computer monitored my vital signs and kept track of
exactly how many calories I burned during the course of each day. If I didn’t
meet my daily exercise requirements, the system prevented me from logging into
my OASIS account. This meant that I couldn’t go to work, continue my quest,
or, in effect, live my life. Once the lockout was engaged, you couldn’t disable it
for two months. And the software was bound to my OASIS account, so I

couldn’t just buy a new computer or go rent a booth in some public OASIS café.
If I wanted to log in, I had no choice but to exercise first. This proved to be the
only motivation I needed.
The lockout software also monitored my dietary intake. Each day I was
allowed to select meals from a preset menu of healthy, low-calorie foods. The
software would order the food for me online and it would be delivered to my
door. Since I never left my apartment, it was easy for the program to keep track
of everything I ate. If I ordered additional food on my own, it would increase the
amount of exercise I had to do each day, to offset my additional calorie intake.
This was some sadistic software.
But it worked. The pounds began to melt off, and after a few months, I was in
near-perfect health. For the first time in my life I had a flat stomach, and
muscles. I also had twice the energy, and I got sick a lot less frequently. When
the two months ended and I was finally given the option to disable the fitness
lockout, I decided to keep it in place. Now, exercising was a part of my daily
ritual.
Once I finished with my weight training, I stepped onto my treadmill. “Begin
morning run,” I said to Max. “Bifrost track.”
The virtual gym vanished. Now I was standing on a semitransparent running
track, a curved looping ribbon suspended in a starry nebula. Giant ringed planets
and multicolored moons were suspended in space all around me. The running
track stretched out ahead of me, rising, falling, and occasionally spiraling into a
helix. An invisible barrier prevented me from accidentally running off the edge
of the track and plummeting into the starry abyss. The Bifrost track was another
stand-alone simulation, one of several hundred track designs stored on my
console’s hard drive.
As I began to run, Max fired up my ’80s music playlist. As the first song
began, I quickly rattled off its title, artist, album, and year of release from
memory: “ ‘A Million Miles Away,’ the Plimsouls, Everywhere at Once, 1983.”
Then I began to sing along, reciting the lyrics. Having the right ’80s song lyric
memorized might save my avatar’s life someday.
When I finished my run, I pulled off my visor and began removing my haptic
suit. This had to be done slowly to prevent damaging the suit’s components. As I
carefully peeled it off, the contact patches made tiny popping sounds as they
pulled free of my skin, leaving tiny circular marks all over my body. Once I had
the suit off, I placed it inside the cleaning unit and laid my clean spare suit out
on the floor.
Max had already turned on the shower for me, setting the water temperature
right where I liked it. As I jumped into the steam-filled stall, Max switched the

music over to my shower tunes playlist. I recognized the opening riffs of
“Change,” by John Waite. From the Vision Quest soundtrack. Geffen Records,
1985.
The shower worked a lot like an old car wash. I just stood there while it did
most of the work, blasting me from all angles with jets of soapy water, then
rinsing me off. I had no hair to wash, because the shower also dispensed a
nontoxic hair-removing solution that I rubbed all over my face and body. This
eliminated the need for me to shave or cut my hair, both hassles I didn’t need.
Having smooth skin also helped make sure my haptic suit fit snugly. I looked a
little freaky without any eyebrows, but I got used to it.
When the rinse jets cut off, the blow-dryers kicked on, blasting the moisture
off of my skin in a matter of seconds. I stepped into the kitchen and took out a
can of Sludge, a high-protein, vitamin D–infused breakfast drink (to help
counteract my sunlight deprivation). As I gulped it down, my computer’s sensors
silently took note, scanning the barcode and adding the calories to my total for
the day. With breakfast out of the way, I pulled on my clean haptic suit. This was
less tricky than taking the suit off, but it still took time to do properly.
Once I had the suit on, I ordered the haptic chair to extend. Then I paused and
spent a moment staring at my immersion rig. I’d been so proud of all this hightech hardware when I’d first purchased it. But over the past few months, I’d
come to see my rig for what it was: an elaborate contraption for deceiving my
senses, to allow me to live in a world that didn’t exist. Each component of my
rig was a bar in the cell where I had willingly imprisoned myself.
Standing there, under the bleak fluorescents of my tiny one-room apartment,
there was no escaping the truth. In real life, I was nothing but an antisocial
hermit. A recluse. A pale-skinned pop culture–obsessed geek. An agoraphobic
shut-in, with no real friends, family, or genuine human contact. I was just
another sad, lost, lonely soul, wasting his life on a glorified videogame.
But not in the OASIS. In there, I was the great Parzival. World-famous gunter
and international celebrity. People asked for my autograph. I had a fan club.
Several, actually. I was recognized everywhere I went (but only when I wanted
to be). I was paid to endorse products. People admired and looked up to me. I
got invited to the most exclusive parties. I went to all the hippest clubs and never
had to wait in line. I was a pop-culture icon, a VR rock star. And, in gunter
circles, I was a legend. Nay, a god.
I sat down and pulled on my gloves and visor. Once my identity was verified,
the Gregarious Simulation Systems logo appeared in front of me, followed by
the log-in prompt.

Greetings, Parzival.
Please speak your pass phrase.
I cleared my throat and recited my pass phrase. Each word appeared on my
display as I said it. “No one in the world ever gets what they want and that is
beautiful.”
There was a brief pause, and then I let out an involuntary sigh of relief as the
OASIS faded into existence all around me.

My avatar slowly materialized in front of the control panel in my
stronghold’s command center, the same spot where I’d been sitting the night
before, engaged in my evening ritual of staring blankly at the Quatrain until I
drifted off to sleep and the system logged me out. I’d been staring at the damn
thing for almost six months now, and I still hadn’t been able to decipher it. No
one had. Everyone had theories, of course, but the Jade Key still remained
unfound, and top rankings on the Scoreboard remained static.
My command center was located under an armored dome embedded in the
rocky surface of my own private asteroid. From here I had a sweeping 360degree view of the surrounding cratered landscape, stretching to the horizon in
all directions. The rest of my stronghold was belowground, in a vast
subterranean complex that stretched all the way to the asteroid’s core. I’d coded
the entire thing myself, shortly after moving to Columbus. My avatar needed a
stronghold, and I didn’t want any neighbors, so I’d bought the cheapest planetoid
I could find—this tiny barren asteroid in Sector Fourteen. Its designation was
S14A316, but I’d renamed it Falco, after the Austrian rap star. (I wasn’t a huge
Falco fan or anything. I just thought it sounded like a cool name.)
Falco had only a few square kilometers of surface area, but it had still cost me
a pretty penny. It had been worth it, though. When you owned your own world,
you could build whatever you wanted there. And no one could visit it unless I
granted them access, something I never gave to anyone. My stronghold was my
home inside the OASIS. My avatar’s sanctuary. It was the one place in the entire
simulation where I was truly safe.
As soon as my log-in sequence completed, a window popped up on my
display, informing me that today was an election day. Now that I was eighteen, I
could vote, in both the OASIS elections and the elections for U.S. government
officials. I didn’t bother with the latter, because I didn’t see the point. The oncegreat country into which I’d been born now resembled its former self in name
only. It didn’t matter who was in charge. Those people were rearranging deck

chairs on the Titanic and everyone knew it. Besides, now that everyone could
vote from home, via the OASIS, the only people who could get elected were
movie stars, reality TV personalities, or radical televangelists.
I did take the time to vote in the OASIS elections, however, because their
outcomes actually affected me. The voting process only took me a few minutes,
because I was already familiar with all of the major issues GSS had put on the
ballot. It was also time to elect the president and VP of the OASIS User Council,
but that was a no-brainer. Like most gunters, I voted to reelect Cory Doctorow
and Wil Wheaton (again). There were no term limits, and those two geezers had
been doing a kick-ass job of protecting user rights for over a decade.
When I finished voting, I adjusted my haptic chair slightly and studied the
command console in front of me. It was crammed with switches, buttons,
keyboards, joysticks, and display screens. A bank of security monitors on my left
were linked to virtual cameras placed throughout the interior and exterior of my
stronghold. To my right, another bank of monitors displayed all of my favorite
news and entertainment vidfeeds. Among these was my own channel: ParzivalTV—Broadcasting obscure eclectic crap, 24-7-365.
Earlier that year, GSS had added a new feature to every OASIS user’s
account: the POV (personal OASIS vidfeed) channel. It allowed anyone who
paid a monthly fee to run their own streaming television network. Anyone
logged into the simulation could tune in and watch your POV channel, from
anywhere in the world. What you aired on your channel and who you allowed to
view it were entirely up to you. Most users chose to run a “voyeur channel,”
which was like being the star of your own twenty-four-hour reality show.
Hovering virtual cameras would follow your avatar around the OASIS as you
went about your day-to-day activities. You could limit access to your channel so
that only your friends could watch, or you could charge viewers by the hour to
access your POV. A lot of second-tier celebrities and pornographers did this,
selling their virtual lives at a per-minute premium.
Some people used their POV to broadcast live video of their real-world selves,
or their dog, or their kids. Some people programmed nothing but old cartoons.
The possibilities were endless, and the variety of stuff available seemed to grow
more twisted every day. Nonstop foot fetish videos broadcast out of Eastern
Europe. Amateur porn featuring deviant soccer moms in Minnesota. You name
it. Every flavor of weirdness the human psyche could cook up was being filmed
and broadcast online. The vast wasteland of television programming had finally
reached its zenith, and the average person was no longer limited to fifteen
minutes of fame. Now everyone could be on TV, every second of every day,
whether or not anyone was watching.

Parzival-TV wasn’t a voyeur channel. In fact, I never showed my avatar’s face
on my vidfeed. Instead, I programmed a selection of classic ’80s TV shows,
retro commercials, cartoons, music videos, and movies. Lots of movies. On the
weekends, I showed old Japanese monster flicks, along with some vintage
anime. Whatever struck my fancy. It didn’t really matter what I programmed.
My avatar was still one of the High Five, so my vidfeed drew millions of
viewers every day, regardless of what I aired, and this allowed me to sell
commercial time to my various sponsors.
Most of Parzival-TV’s regular viewers were gunters who monitored my
vidfeed with the hope that I’d inadvertently reveal some key piece of
information about the Jade Key or the egg itself. I never did, of course. At the
moment, Parzival-TV was wrapping up a nonstop two-day Kikaider marathon.
Kikaider was a late-’70s Japanese action show about a red-and-blue android who
beat the crap out of rubber-suited monsters in each episode. I had a weakness for
vintage kaiju and tokusatsu, shows like Spectreman, The Space Giants, and
Supaidaman.
I pulled up my programming grid and made a few changes to my evening
lineup. I cleared away the episodes of Riptide and Misfits of Science I’d
programmed and dropped in a few back-to-back flicks starring Gamera, my
favorite giant flying turtle. I thought they should be real crowd pleasers. Then, to
finish off the broadcast day, I added a few episodes of Silver Spoons.
Art3mis also ran her own vidfeed channel, Art3mivision, and I always kept
one of my monitors tuned to it. Right now, she was airing her usual Monday
evening fare: an episode of Square Pegs. After that would be ElectraWoman and
DynaGirl, followed by back-to-back episodes of Isis and Wonder Woman. Her
programming lineup hadn’t changed in ages. But it didn’t matter. She still got
killer ratings. Recently, she’d also launched her own wildly successful clothing
line for full-figured female avatars, under the label Art3Miss. She was doing
really well for herself.
After that night in the Distracted Globe, Art3mis had cut off all contact with
me. She blocked all of my e-mails, phone calls, and chat requests. She also
stopped making posts to her blog.
I tried everything I could think of to reach her. I sent her avatar flowers. I
made multiple trips to her avatar’s stronghold, an armored palace on Benatar, the
small moon she owned. I dropped mix tapes and notes on her palace from the air,
like lovesick bombs. Once, in a supreme act of desperation, I stood outside her
palace gates for two solid hours, with a boom box over my head, blasting “In
Your Eyes” by Peter Gabriel at full volume.
She didn’t come out. I don’t even know if she was home.

I’d been living in Columbus for over five months now, and it had been eight
long, torturous weeks since I’d last spoken to Art3mis. But I hadn’t spent that
time moping around and feeling sorry for myself. Well, not all of it, anyway. I’d
tried to enjoy my “new life” as a world-famous sector-hopping gunter. Even
though I’d maxxed out my avatar’s power level, I continued to complete as
many quests as possible, to add to my already impressive collection of weapons,
magic items, and vehicles, which I kept in a vault deep within my stronghold.
Questing kept me busy and served as a welcome distraction from the growing
loneliness and isolation I felt.
I’d tried to reconnect with Aech after Art3mis had dumped me, but things
weren’t the same. We’d grown apart, and I knew it was my fault. Our
conversations were now stilted and reserved, as if we were both afraid of
revealing some key piece of information the other might be able to use. I could
tell he no longer trusted me. And while I’d been off obsessing over Art3mis, it
seemed Aech had become obsessed with being the first gunter to find the Jade
Key. But it had been almost half a year since we’d cleared the First Gate, and the
Jade Key’s location still remained a mystery.
I hadn’t spoken to Aech in almost a month. My last conversation with him had
devolved into a shouting match, which had ended when I reminded Aech that he
“never even would have found the Copper Key” if I hadn’t led him straight to it.
He’d glared at me in silence for a second, then logged out of the chat room.
Stubborn pride kept me from calling him back right away to apologize, and now
it seemed like too much time had passed.
Yeah. I was on a roll. In less than six months, I’d managed to wreck both of
my closest friendships.
I flipped over to Aech’s channel, which he called the H-Feed. He was
currently showing a WWF match from the late ’80s, featuring Hulk Hogan and
Andre the Giant. I didn’t even bother checking Daito and Shoto’s channel, the
Daishow, because I knew they’d be showing some old samurai movie. That’s all
those guys ever aired.
A few months after our confrontational first meeting in Aech’s basement, I’d
managed to form a tenuous friendship with Daito and Shoto when the three of us
teamed up to complete an extended quest in Sector Twenty-two. It was my idea.
I felt bad about how our first encounter had ended, and I waited for an
opportunity to extend some sort of olive branch to the two samurai. It came
when I discovered a hidden high-level quest called Shodai Urutoraman on the
planet Tokusatsu. The creation date in the quest’s colophon said it had been
launched several years after Halliday’s death, which meant it couldn’t have any
relation to the contest. It was also a Japanese-language quest, created by GSS’s

Hokkaido division. I could have tried to complete it on my own, using the
Mandarax real-time translator software installed in all OASIS accounts, but it
would have been risky. Mandarax had been known to garble or misinterpret
quest instructions and cues, which could easily lead to fatal mistakes.
Daito and Shoto lived in Japan (they’d become national heroes there), and I
knew that they both spoke Japanese and English fluently. So I’d contacted them
to ask if they were interested in teaming up with me, just for this one quest. They
were skeptical at first, but after I described the unique nature of the quest, and
what I believed the payoff for solving it might be, they finally agreed. The three
of us met outside the quest gate on Tokusatsu and entered it together.
The quest was a re-creation of all thirty-nine episodes of the original
Ultraman TV series, which had aired on Japanese television from 1966 to 1967.
The show’s storyline centered around a human named Hayata who was a
member of the Science Patrol, an organization devoted to fighting the hordes of
giant Godzilla-like monsters that were constantly attacking Earth and threatening
human civilization. When the Science Patrol encountered a threat they couldn’t
handle on their own, Hayata would use an alien device called a Beta Capsule to
transform into an alien super-being known as Ultraman. Then he would proceed
to kick the monster-of-the-week’s ass, using all sorts of kung-fu moves and
energy attacks.
If I’d entered the quest gate by myself, I would have automatically played
through the entire series storyline as Hayata. But because Shoto, Daito, and I had
all entered at once, we were each allowed to select a different Science Patrol
team member to play. We could then change or swap characters at the start of the
next level or “episode.” The three of us took turns playing Hayata and his
Science Patrol teammates Hoshino and Arashi. As with most quests in the
OASIS, playing as a team made it easier to defeat the various enemies and
complete each of the levels.
It took us an entire week, often playing over sixteen hours a day, before we
were finally able to clear all thirty-nine levels and complete the quest. As we
stepped out of the quest gate, our avatars were each awarded a huge amount of
experience points and several thousand credits. But the real prize for completing
the quest was an incredibly rare artifact: Hayata’s Beta Capsule. The small metal
cylinder allowed the avatar who possessed it to transform into Ultraman once a
day, for up to three minutes.
Since there were three of us, there was a debate over who should be allowed
to keep the artifact. “Parzival should have it,” Shoto had said, turning to his
older brother. “He found this quest. We wouldn’t even have known about it, were
it not for him.”

Of course, Daito had disagreed. “And he would not have been able to
complete the quest without our help!” He said the only fair thing to do would be
to auction off the Beta Capsule and split the proceeds. But there was no way I
could allow that. The artifact was far too valuable to sell, and I knew it would
end up in the hands of the Sixers, because they purchased nearly every major
artifact that went up for auction. I also saw this as an opportunity to get on
Daisho’s good side.
“You two should keep the Beta Capsule,” I said. “Urutoraman is Japan’s
greatest superhero. His powers belong in Japanese hands.”
They were both surprised and humbled by my generosity. Especially Daito.
“Thank you, Parzival-san,” he said, bowing low. “You are a man of honor.”
After that, the three of us had parted as friends, if not necessarily allies, and I
considered that an ample reward for my efforts.
A chime sounded in my ears and I checked the time. It was almost eight
o’clock. Time to make the doughnuts.

I was always hard-up for cash, no matter how frugal I tried to be. I had several
large bills to pay each month, both in the real world and in the OASIS. My realworld expenses were pretty standard. Rent, electricity, food, water. Hardware
repairs and upgrades. My avatar’s expenses were far more exotic. Spacecraft
repairs. Teleportation fees. Power cells. Ammunition. I purchased my ammo in
bulk, but it still wasn’t cheap. And my monthly teleportation expenses were
often astronomical. My search for the egg required constant travel, and GSS kept
raising their teleportation fares.
I’d already spent all of my remaining product endorsement dough. Most of it
went toward the cost of my rig and buying my own asteroid. I earned a decent
amount of money each month by selling commercial time on my POV channel
and by auctioning off any unneeded magic items, armor, or weapons I acquired
during my travels. But my primary source of income was my full-time job doing
OASIS technical support.
When I’d created my new Bryce Lynch identity, I’d given myself a college
degree, along with multiple technical certifications and a long, sterling work
record as an OASIS programmer and app developer. However, despite my
sterling bogus résumé, the only job I’d been able to get was as a tier-one
technical support representative at Helpful Helpdesk Inc., one of the contract
firms GSS used to handle OASIS customer service and support. Now I worked
forty hours a week, helping morons reboot their OASIS consoles and update the
drivers for their haptic gloves. It was grueling work, but it paid the rent.

I logged out of my own OASIS account and then used my rig to log into a
separate OASIS account I’d been issued for work. The log-in process completed
and I took control of a Happy Helpdesk avatar, a cookie-cutter Ken doll that I
used to take tech-support calls. This avatar appeared inside a huge virtual call
center, inside a virtual cubicle, sitting at a virtual desk, in front of a virtual
computer, wearing a virtual phone headset.
I thought of this place as my own private virtual hell.
Helpful Helpdesk Inc. took millions of calls a day, from all over the world.
Twenty-four seven, three sixty-five. One angry, befuddled cretin after another.
There was no downtime between calls, because there were always several
hundred morons in the call queue, all of them willing to wait on hold for hours to
have a tech rep hold their hand and fix their problem. Why bother looking up the
solution online? Why try to figure the problem out on your own when you could
have someone else do your thinking for you?
As usual, my ten-hour shift passed slowly. It was impossible for helpdesk
avatars to leave their cubicles, but I found other ways to pass the time. My work
account was rigged so that I couldn’t browse outside websites, but I’d hacked
my visor to allow me to listen to music or stream movies off my hard drive while
I took calls.
When my shift finally ended and I logged out of work, I immediately logged
back into my own OASIS account. I had thousands of new e-mail messages
waiting, and I could tell just by their subject lines what had happened while I’d
been at work.
Art3mis had found the Jade Key.

Like other gunters around the globe, I’d been dreading the next change on
the Scoreboard, because I knew it was going to give the Sixers an unfair
advantage.
A few months after we’d all cleared the First Gate, an anonymous avatar had
placed an ultrapowerful artifact up for auction. It was called Fyndoro’s Tablet of
Finding, and it had unique powers that could give its owner a huge advantage in
the hunt for Halliday’s Easter egg.
Most of the virtual items in the OASIS were created by the system at random,
and they would “drop” when you killed an NPC or completed a quest. The rarest
such items were artifacts, superpowerful magic items that gave their owners
incredible abilities. Only a few hundred of these artifacts existed, and most of
them dated back to the earliest days of the OASIS, when it was still primarily an
MMO game. Every artifact was unique, meaning that only one copy of it existed
in the entire simulation. Usually, the way to obtain an artifact was to defeat some
godlike villain at the end of a high-level quest. If you got lucky, the bad guy
would drop an artifact when you killed him. You could also obtain an artifact by
killing an avatar who had one in its inventory, or by purchasing one in an online
auction.
Since artifacts were so rare, it was always big news when one went up for
auction. Some had been known to sell for hundreds of thousands of credits,
depending on their powers. The record had been set three years ago when an
artifact called the Cataclyst was auctioned off. According to its auction listing,
the Cataclyst was a sort of magical bomb, and it could be used only once. When
it was detonated, it would kill every single avatar and NPC in the sector,
including its owner. There was no defense against it. If you were unlucky
enough to be in the same sector when it went off, you were a goner, regardless of
how powerful or well protected you were.
The Cataclyst had sold to an anonymous bidder for just over a million credits.
The artifact still hadn’t been detonated, so its new owner still had it sitting

around somewhere, waiting for the right time to use it. It was something of a
running joke now. When a gunter was surrounded by avatars she didn’t like, she
would claim to have the Cataclyst in her inventory and threaten to detonate it.
But most people suspected that the item had actually fallen into the Sixers’
hands, along with countless other powerful artifacts.
Fyndoro’s Tablet of Finding wound up selling for even more than the
Cataclyst. According to the auction description, the tablet was a flat circle of
polished black stone, and it had one very simple power. Once a day, its owner
could write any avatar’s name on its surface, and the tablet would display that
avatar’s location at that exact moment. However, this power had range
limitations. If you were in a different OASIS sector than the avatar you were
trying to find, the tablet would tell you only which sector your target was
currently in. If you were already in the same sector, the tablet would tell you
what planet your target was currently on (or closest to, if they were out in space).
If you were already on the same planet as your target when you used the tablet, it
would show you their exact coordinates on a map.
As the artifact’s seller made sure to point out in his auction listing, if you used
the tablet’s power in conjunction with the Scoreboard, it arguably became the
most valuable artifact in the entire OASIS. All you had to do was watch the top
rankings on the Scoreboard and wait until someone’s score increased. The
second that happened, you could write that avatar’s name on the tablet and it
would tell you where they were at that exact moment, thus revealing the location
of the key they’d just found, or the gate they’d just exited. Due to the artifact’s
range limitations, it might take two or three attempts to narrow down the exact
location of a key or a gate, but even so, that was still information a lot of people
would be willing to kill for.
When Fyndoro’s Tablet of Finding went up for auction, a huge bidding war
broke out between several of the large gunter clans. But when the auction finally
ended, the tablet wound up selling to the Sixers for almost two million credits.
Sorrento himself used his own IOI account to bid on the tablet. He waited until
the last few seconds of the auction and then outbid everyone. He could have bid
anonymously, but he obviously wanted the world to know who now possessed
the artifact. It was also his way of letting those of us in the High Five know that
from that moment forward, whenever one of us found a key or cleared a gate, the
Sixers would be tracking us. And there was nothing we could do about it.
At first, I was worried the Sixers would also try to use the tablet to hunt down
each of our avatars and kill us one at a time. But locating our avatars wouldn’t
do them any good unless we happened to be in a PvP zone at the time and were
stupid enough to stay put until the Sixers could reach us. And since the tablet

could be used only once a day, they would also run the risk of missing their
window of opportunity if the Scoreboard changed on the same day they tried to
use the tablet to locate one of us. They didn’t take the chance. They kept the
artifact in reserve and waited for their moment.

Less than a half hour after Art3mis’s score increase, the entire Sixer fleet was
spotted converging on Sector Seven. The moment the Scoreboard changed, the
Sixers had obviously used Fyndoro’s Tablet of Finding to try to ascertain
Art3mis’s exact location. Luckily, the Sixer avatar using the tablet (probably
Sorrento himself) happened to be in a different sector from Art3mis, so the tablet
didn’t reveal what planet she was on. It only told the Sixers which sector she was
currently in. And so the entire Sixer fleet had immediately hightailed it to Sector
Seven.
Thanks to their complete lack of subtlety, the whole world now knew the Jade
Key must be hidden somewhere in that sector. Naturally, thousands of gunters
began to converge on it too. The Sixers had narrowed the search area for
everyone. Luckily, Sector Seven contained hundreds of planets, moons, and
other worlds, and the Jade Key could have been hidden on any one of them.
I spent the rest of the day in shock, reeling at the news that I’d been
dethroned. That was exactly how the newsfeed headlines put it: PARZIVAL
DETHRONED! ART3MIS NEW #1 GUNTER! SIXERS CLOSING IN!

Once I finally got a grip, I pulled up the Scoreboard and made myself stare at
it for thirty solid minutes while I mentally berated myself.
HIGH SCORES:
1. Art3mis
2. Parzival
3. Aech
4. Daito
5. Shoto
6. IOI-655321
7. IOI-643187
8. IOI-621671
9. IOI-678324
10. IOI-637330

129,000
110,000
108,000
107,000
106,000
105,000
105,000
105,000
105,000
105,000

You’ve got no one but yourself to blame, I told myself. You let success go to
your head. You slacked off on your research. What, did you think lightning would
strike twice? That eventually you’d just stumble across the clue you needed to
find the Jade Key? Sitting in first place all that time gave you a false sense of
security. But you don’t have that problem now, do you, asshead? No, because
instead of buckling down and focusing on your quest like you should have, you
pissed away your lead. You wasted almost half a year screwing around and
pining over some girl you’ve never even met in person. The girl who dumped
you. The same girl who is going to end up beating you.
Now … get your head back in the game, moron. Find that key.
Suddenly, I wanted to win the contest more than ever. Not just for the money.
I wanted to prove myself to Art3mis. And I wanted the Hunt to be over, so that
she would talk to me again. So that I could finally meet her in person, see her
true face, and try to make sense of how I felt about her.
I cleared the Scoreboard off my display and opened up my grail diary, which
had now grown into a vast mountain of data containing every scrap of
information I’d collected since the contest began. It appeared as a jumble of
cascading windows floating in front of me, displaying text, maps, photos, and
audio and video files, all indexed, cross-referenced, and pulsing with life.
I kept the Quatrain open in a window that was always on top. Four lines of
text. Twenty-four words. Thirty-four syllables. I’d stared at them so often and for
so long that they’d nearly lost all meaning. Looking at them again now, I had to
resist the urge to scream in rage and frustration.
The captain conceals the Jade Key
in a dwelling long neglected
But you can only blow the whistle
once the trophies are all collected
I knew the answer was right there in front of me. Art3mis had already figured
it out.
I read over my notes about John Draper, aka Captain Crunch, and the toy
plastic whistle that had made him famous in the annals of hacker lore. I still
believed that these were the “captain” and “whistle” Halliday was referring to.
But the rest of the Quatrain’s meaning remained a mystery.
But now I possessed a new piece of information—the key was somewhere in
Sector Seven. So I pulled up my OASIS atlas and began to search for planets
with names I thought might somehow be related to the Quatrain. I found a few

worlds named after famous hackers, like Woz and Mitnick, but none named after
John Draper. Sector Seven also contained hundreds of worlds named after old
Usenet newsgroups, and on one of these, the planet alt.phreaking, there was a
statue of Draper posing with an ancient rotary phone in one hand and a Cap’n
Crunch whistle in the other. But the statue had been erected three years after
Halliday’s death, so I knew it was a dead end.
I read through the Quatrain yet again, and this time the last two lines jumped
out at me:
But you can only blow the whistle
once the trophies are all collected
Trophies. Somewhere in Sector Seven. I needed to find a collection of trophies
in Sector Seven.
I did a quick search of my files on Halliday. From what I could tell, the only
trophies he’d ever owned were the five Game Designer of the Year awards he’d
won back around the turn of the century. These trophies were still on display in
the GSS Museum in Columbus, but there were replicas of them on display inside
the OASIS, on a planet called Archaide.
And Archaide was located in Sector Seven.
The connection seemed thin, but I still wanted to check it out. At the very
least, it would make me feel like I was doing something productive for the next
few hours.
I glanced over at Max, who was currently doing the samba on one of my
command center’s monitors. “Max, prep the Vonnegut for takeoff. If you’re not
too busy.”
Max stopped dancing and smirked at me. “You got it, El Comanchero!”
I got up and walked over to my stronghold’s elevator, which I’d modeled after
the turbolift on the original Star Trek series. I rode down four levels to my
armory, a massive vault filled with storage shelves, display cases, and weapon
racks. I pulled up my avatar’s inventory display, which appeared as a classic
“paper doll” diagram of my avatar, onto which I could drag and drop various
items and pieces of equipment.
Archaide was located in a PvP zone, so I decided to upgrade my gear and wear
my Sunday best. I put on my gleaming +10 Hale Mail powered armor, then
strapped on my favorite set of blaster pistols and slung a pump-action pistol-grip
shotgun across my back, along with a +5 Vorpal Bastard Sword. I also grabbed a
few other essential items. An extra pair of antigrav boots. A Ring of Magic
Resistance. An Amulet of Protection. Some Gauntlets of Giant Strength. I hated

the idea of needing something and not having it with me, so I usually ended up
carrying enough equipment for three gunters. When I ran out of room on my
avatar’s body, I stored the additional gear in my Backpack of Holding.
Once I was properly outfitted, I hopped back on the elevator, and a few
seconds later I arrived at the entrance of my hangar, located on the bottom level
of my stronghold. Pulsing blue lights lined the runway, which ran up the center
of the hangar to a massive pair of armored doors at the far end. These doors
opened into the launch tunnel, which led up to a matching set of armored doors
set into the asteroid’s surface.
Standing on the left side of the runway was my battle-worn X-wing fighter.
Parked on the right side was my DeLorean. Sitting on the runway itself was my
most frequently used spacecraft, the Vonnegut. Max had already powered up the
engines, and they emitted a low, steady roar that filled the hangar. The Vonnegut
was a heavily modified Firefly-class transport vessel, modeled after the Serenity
in the classic Firefly TV series. The ship had been named the Kaylee when I’d
first obtained it, but I’d immediately rechristened it after one of my favorite
twentieth-century novelists. Its new name was stenciled on the side of its
battered gray hull.
I’d looted the Vonnegut from a cadre of Oviraptor clansmen who had foolishly
attempted to hijack my X-wing while I was cruising through a large group of
worlds in Sector Eleven known as the Whedonverse. The Oviraptors were cocky
bastards with no clue who it was they were messing with. I was in a foul mood
even before they’d opened fire on me. Otherwise, I probably would have just
evaded them by jumping to light speed. But that day I decided to take their
attack personally.
Ships were like most other items in the OASIS. Each one had specific
attributes, weapons, and speed capabilities. My X-wing was far more
maneuverable than the Oviraptors’ large transport ship, so it was no trouble for
me to avoid the barrage from their aftermarket guns, while I bombarded them
with laser bolts and proton torpedoes. After I disabled their engines, I boarded
the ship and proceeded to kill every avatar there. The captain tried to apologize
when he saw who I was, but I wasn’t in a forgiving mood. After I’d dispatched
the crew, I parked my X-wing in the cargo hold and then cruised home in my
new ship.
As I approached the Vonnegut, the loading ramp extended to the hangar floor.
By the time I reached the cockpit, the ship was already lifting off. I heard the
landing gear retract with a thud just as I seated myself at the controls.
“Max, lock up the house, and set a course for Archaide.”
“Aye, C-c-captain,” Max stuttered from one of the cockpit monitors. The

hangar doors slid open, and the Vonnegut rocketed out the launch tunnel and up
into the starry sky. As the ship cleared the surface, the armored tunnel doors
slammed closed behind it.
I spotted several ships camped out in a high orbit above Falco. The usual
suspects: crazed fans, wannabe disciples, and aspiring bounty hunters. A few of
them, the ones currently turning to follow me, were tagalongs—people who
spent most of their time trying to tail prominent gunters and gather intel on their
movements so they could sell the information later. I was always able to lose
these idiots by jumping to light speed. A lucky thing for them. If I couldn’t lose
someone who was trying to tail me, I usually had no choice but to stop and kill
them.
As the Vonnegut made the jump to light speed, each of the planets on my
viewscreen became a long streak of light. “Li-li-light speed engaged, Captain,”
Max reported. “ETA to Archaide is estimated at fifty-three minutes. Fifteen if
you want to use the nearest stargate.”
Stargates were strategically located throughout each sector. They were really
just giant spaceship-sized teleporters, but since they charged by the mass of your
ship and the distance you wanted to travel, they were normally used only by
corporations or extremely wealthy avatars with credits to burn. I was neither, but
under the circumstances, I was willing to splurge a little.
“Let’s take the stargate, Max. We’re in kind of a hurry.”

The Vonnegut dropped out of light speed, and Archaide suddenly filled the
cockpit viewscreen. It stood out from the other planets in the area because it
wasn’t coded to look real. All of the neighboring planets were perfectly
rendered, with clouds, continents, or impact craters covering their curved
surfaces. But Archaide had none of these features, because it was home to the
OASIS’s largest classic videogame museum, and its appearance had been
designed as a tribute to the vector-graphic games of the late ’70s and early ’80s.
The planet’s only surface feature was a web of glowing green dots similar to the
ground lights on an airport runway. They were spaced evenly across the globe in
a perfect grid, so that, from orbit, Archaide resembled the vector-graphic Death
Star from Atari’s 1983 Star Wars arcade game.
As Max piloted the Vonnegut down to the surface, I prepared for the
possibility of combat by charging up my armor and buffing my avatar with
several potions and nano packs. Archaide was both a PvP zone and a chaos zone,
which meant that both magic and technology functioned here. So I made sure to
load up all of my combat contingency macros.
The Vonnegut’s perfectly rendered steel loading ramp lowered to the ground,
standing out in sharp contrast against the digital blackness of Archaide’s surface.
As I stepped off the ramp, I tapped a keypad on my right wrist. The ramp
retracted, and there was a sharp hum as the ship’s security system activated. A
transparent blue shield appeared around the Vonnegut’s hull.
I gazed around at the horizon, which was just a jagged green vector line,
denoting mountainous terrain. Here on the surface, Archaide looked exactly like
the environment of the 1981 game Battlezone, another vector-graphic classic
from Atari. In the distance, a triangular volcano spewed green pixels of lava.
You could run toward that volcano for days and never reach it. It always
remained at the horizon. Just like in an old videogame, the scenery never
changed on Archaide, even if you circumnavigated the globe.
Following my instructions, Max had set the Vonnegut down in a landing lot

near the equator in the eastern hemisphere. The lot was empty, and the
surrounding area appeared deserted. I headed toward the nearest green dot. As I
approached, I could see that it was actually the mouth of an entrance tunnel, a
neon green circle ten meters in diameter leading belowground. Archaide was a
hollow planet, and the museum exhibits were all located beneath the surface.
As I approached the nearest tunnel entrance, I heard loud music emanating
from below. I recognized the song as “Pour Some Sugar on Me” by Def
Leppard, off their Hysteria album (Epic Records, 1987). I reached the edge of
the glowing green ring and jumped in. As my avatar plummeted down into the
museum, the green vector-graphic theme disappeared and I found myself in
high-resolution full-color surroundings. Everything around me looked
completely real once again.
Below its surface, Archaide housed thousands of classic video arcades, each
one a loving re-creation of an actual arcade that had once existed somewhere in
the real world. Since the dawn of the OASIS, thousands of elderly users had
come here and painstakingly coded virtual replicas of local arcades they
remembered from their childhood, thus making them a permanent part of the
museum. And each of these simulated game rooms, bowling alleys, and pizza
joints was lined with classic arcade games. There was at least one copy of every
coin-operated videogame ever made down here. The original game ROMs were
all stored in the planet’s OASIS code, and their wooden game cabinets were each
coded to look like the antique originals. Hundreds of shrines and exhibits
devoted to various game designers and publishers were also scattered throughout
the museum.
The museum’s various levels were comprised of vast caverns linked by a
network of subterranean streets, tunnels, staircases, elevators, escalators, ladders,
slides, trapdoors, and secret passageways. It was like a massive underground
multilevel labyrinth. The layout made it extremely easy to get lost, so I kept a
three-dimensional holographic map on my display. My avatar’s present location
was indicated by a flashing blue dot. I’d entered the museum next to an old
arcade called Aladdin’s Castle, close to the surface. I touched a point on the map
near the core of the planet, indicating my destination, and the software mapped
the quickest route for me to get there. I ran forward, following it.
The museum was divided into layers. Here, near the planet’s mantle, you
could find the last coin-operated videogames ever made, from the first few
decades of the twenty-first century. These were mostly dedicated simulator
cabinets with first-generation haptics—vibrating chairs and tilting hydraulic
platforms. Lots of networked stock car simulators that allowed people to race
each other. These games were the last of their kind. By that era, home

videogame consoles had already made most coin-op games obsolete. After the
OASIS went online, they stopped making them altogether.
As you ventured deeper into the museum, the games grew older and more
archaic. Turn-of-the-century coin-ops. Lots of head-to-head fighting games with
blocky polygon-rendered figures beating the crap out of each other on large flatscreen monitors. Shooting games played with crude haptic light guns. Dancing
games. Once you reached the level below that, the games all began to look
identical. Each was housed in a large rectangular wooden box containing a
cathode picture tube with a set of crude game controls mounted in front of it.
You used your hands and your eyes (and occasionally your feet) to play these
games. There were no haptics. These games didn’t make you feel anything. And
the deeper I descended, the cruder the game graphics got.
The museum’s bottom level, located in the planet core, was a spherical room
containing a shrine to the very first videogame, Tennis for Two, invented by
William Higinbotham in 1958. The game ran on an ancient analog computer and
was played on a tiny oscilloscope screen about five inches in diameter. Next to it
was a replica of an ancient PDP-1 computer running a copy of Spacewar!, the
second videogame ever made, created by a bunch of students at MIT in 1962.
Like most gunters, I’d already visited Archaide a few times. I’d been to the
core and had played both Tennis for Two and Spacewar! until I’d mastered them.
Then I’d wandered around the museums’ many levels, playing games and
looking for clues Halliday might have left behind. But I’d never found anything.
I kept running, farther and farther down, until I reached the Gregarious
Simulation Systems Museum, which was located just a few levels above the
planet core. I’d been here once before too, so I knew my way around. There
were exhibits devoted to all of GSS’s most popular games, including several
arcade ports of titles they’d originally released for home computers and
consoles. It didn’t take me long to find the exhibit where Halliday’s five Game
Designer of the Year trophies were displayed, next to a bronze statue of the man
himself.
Within a few minutes, I knew I was wasting my time here. The GSS Museum
exhibit was coded so that it was impossible to remove any of the items on
display, so the trophies could not be “collected.” I spent a few minutes trying in
vain to cut one of them free of its pedestal with a laser welding torch before
calling it quits.
Another dead end. This whole trip had been a waste of time. I took one last
look around and headed for the exit, trying not to let my frustration get the best
of me.
I decided to take a different route on my way back up to the surface, through a

section of the museum I’d never fully explored on my previous visits. I
wandered through a series of tunnels that led me into a giant, cavernous
chamber. It contained a kind of underground city comprised entirely of pizza
joints, bowling alleys, convenience stores, and, of course, video arcades. I
wandered through the maze of empty streets, then down a winding back alley
that dead-ended by the entrance of a small pizza shop.
I froze in my tracks when I saw the name of the place.
It was called Happytime Pizza, and it was a replica of a small family-run pizza
joint that had existed in Halliday’s hometown in the mid-1980s. Halliday
appeared to have copied the code for Happytime Pizza from his Middletown
simulation and hidden a duplicate of it here in the Archaide museum.
What the hell was it doing here? I’d never seen its existence mentioned on any
of the gunter message boards or strategy guides. Was it possible no one had ever
spotted it before now?
Halliday mentioned Happytime Pizza several times in the Almanac, so I knew
he had fond memories of this place. He’d often come here after school, to avoid
going home.
The interior re-created the atmosphere of a classic ’80s pizza parlor and video
arcade in loving detail. Several NPC employees stood behind the counter,
tossing dough and slicing pies. (I turned on my Olfatrix tower and discovered
that I could actually smell the tomato sauce.) The shop was divided into two
halves, the game room and the dining room. The dining room had videogames in
it as well—all of the glass-top tables were actually sit-down arcade games
known as “cocktail cabinets.” You could sit and play Donkey Kong on the table
while you ate your pizza.
If I’d been hungry, I could have ordered a real slice of pizza at the counter.
The order would have been forwarded to a pizza vendor near my apartment
complex, the one I’d specified in my OASIS account’s food service preference
settings. Then a slice would have been delivered to my door in a matter of
minutes, and the cost (including tip) would have been deducted from my OASIS
account balance.
As I walked into the game room, I heard a Bryan Adams song blasting out of
the speakers mounted on the carpeted walls. Bryan was singing about how,
everywhere he went, the kids wanted to rock. I pressed my thumb to a plate on
the change machine and bought a single quarter. I scooped it out of the stainlesssteel tray and headed to the back of the game room, taking in all of the
simulation’s little details. I spotted a handwritten note taped to the marquee of a
Defender game. It read BEAT THE OWNER’S HIGH SCORE AND WIN A FREE LARGE
PIZZA!

A Robotron game was currently displaying its high-score list. Robotron
allowed its all-time best player to enter an entire sentence of text beside their
score instead of just their initials, and this machine’s top dog had used his
precious victory space to announce that Vice-Principal Rundberg is a total
douchebag!
I continued farther into the dark electronic cave and walked up to a Pac-Man
machine at the very back of the room, wedged between a Galaga and a Dig Dug.
The black-and-yellow cabinet was covered with chips and scratches, and the
garish side-art was peeling.
The Pac-Man game’s monitor was dark, and there was an OUT OF ORDER sign
taped to it. Why would Halliday include a broken game in this simulation? Was
this just another atmospheric detail? Intrigued, I decided to investigate further.
I pulled the game cabinet out from the wall and saw that the power cord was
unplugged. I plugged it back into the wall socket and waited for the game to boot
up. It seemed to work fine.
As I was shoving the cabinet back into place, I spotted something. At the top
of the game, resting on the metal brace that held the glass marquee in place, was
a single quarter. The date on the coin was 1981—the year Pac-Man had been
released.
I knew that back in the ’80s, placing your quarter on a game’s marquee was
how you reserved the next turn on the machine. But when I tried to remove the
quarter, it wouldn’t budge. Like it was welded in place.
Weird.
I slapped the OUT OF ORDER sign on the neighboring Galaga cabinet and looked
at the start-up screen, which was listing off the game’s villainous ghosts: Inky,
Blinky, Pinky, and Clyde. The high score at the top of the screen was 3,333,350
points.
Several things were strange about this. In the real world, Pac-Man machines
didn’t save their high score if they were unplugged. And the high-score counter
was supposed to flip over at 1,000,000 points. But this machine displayed a high
score of 3,333,350 points—just 10 points shy of the highest Pac-Man score
possible.
The only way to beat that score would be to play a perfect game.
I felt my pulse quicken. I’d uncovered something here. Some sort of Easter
egg, hidden inside this old coin-op videogame. It wasn’t the Easter egg. Just an
Easter egg. Some sort of challenge or puzzle, one I was almost certain had been
created and placed here by Halliday. I didn’t know if it had anything to do with
the Jade Key. It might not be related to the egg at all. But there was only one
way to find out.

I would have to play a perfect game of Pac-Man.
This was no easy feat. You had to play all 256 levels perfectly, all the way up
to the final split-screen. And you had to eat every single dot, energizer, fruit, and
ghost possible along the way, without ever losing a single life. Less than twenty
perfect games had been documented in the game’s sixty-year history. One of
them, the fastest perfect game ever played, had been accomplished by James
Halliday in just under four hours. He’d done it on an original Pac-Man machine
located in the Gregarious Games break room.
Because I knew Halliday loved the game, I’d already done a fair amount of
research on Pac-Man. But I’d never managed to play a perfect game. Of course,
I’d never really made a serious attempt. Up until now, I’d never had a reason to.
I opened my grail diary and pulled up all of the Pac-Man–related data I’d ever
collected. The original game code. The unabridged biography of the designer,
Toru Iwatani. Every Pac-Man strategy guide ever written. Every episode of the
Pac-Man cartoon series. The ingredients for Pac-Man cereal. And, of course,
patterns. I had Pac-Man pattern diagrams out the wazoo, along with hundreds of
hours of archived video of the best Pac-Man players in history. I’d already
studied a lot of this stuff, but I skimmed over it again now to refresh my
memory. Then I closed my grail diary and studied the Pac-Man machine in front
of me, like a gunfighter sizing up an opponent.
I stretched my arms, rolled my head and neck around on my shoulders, and
cracked my knuckles.
When I dropped a quarter into the left coin slot, the game emitted a familiar
electronic bea-wup! sound. I tapped the Player One button, and the first maze
appeared on the screen.
I wrapped my right hand around the joystick and began to play, guiding my
pizza-shaped protagonist through one maze after another. Wakka-wakka-wakkawakka.
My synthetic surroundings faded away as I focused on the game and lost
myself in its ancient two-dimensional reality. Just as with Dungeons of
Daggorath, I was now playing a simulation within a simulation. A game within a
game.

I had several false starts. I would play for an hour, or even two; then I’d make
one tiny mistake and I’d have to reboot the machine and start all over. But I was
now on my eighth attempt, and I’d been playing for six hours straight. I was
rockin’ like Dokken. This game had been Iceman-perfect so far. Two-hundred
and fifty-five screens in and I still hadn’t made a single mistake. I’d managed to

nail all four ghosts with every single power pill (until the eighteenth maze, when
they stop turning blue altogether), and I’d snagged every bonus fruit, bird, bell,
and key that had appeared, without dying once.
I was having the best game of my life. This was it. I could feel it. Everything
was finally falling in to place. I had the glow.
There was a spot in each maze, just above the starting position, where it was
possible to “hide” Pac-Man for up to fifteen minutes. In that location, the ghosts
couldn’t find him. Using this trick, I’d been able to take two quick food and
bathroom breaks during the past six hours.
As I chomped my way through the 255th screen, the song “Pac-Man Fever”
began to blast out of the game room stereo. A smile crept onto my face. I knew
this had to be a small tip-of-the-hat from Halliday.
Sticking to my tried-and-true pattern one last time, I whipped the joystick
right, slid into the secret door, then out the opposite side and straight down to
snag the last few remaining dots, clearing the board. I took a deep breath as the
outline of the blue maze began to pulse white. And then I saw it, staring me in
the face. The fabled split-screen. The end of the game.
Then, in the worst case of bad timing imaginable, a Scoreboard alert flashed
on my display, just a few seconds after I began to play through the final screen.
The top ten rankings appeared, superimposed over my view of the Pac-Man
screen, and I glanced at them just long enough to see that Aech had now become
the second person to find the Jade Key. His score had just jumped 19,000 points,
putting him in second place and knocking me into third.
By some miracle, I managed not to flip out. I stayed focused on my Pac-Man
game.
I gripped the joystick tighter, refusing to let this wreck my concentration. I
was nearly finished! I only had to milk the final 6,760 possible points from this
last garbled maze and then I would finally have the high score.
My heart pounded in time with the music as I cleared the unblemished left
half of the maze. Then I ventured into the twisted terrain of the right half,
guiding Pac-Man through the pixelated on-screen refuse of the game’s depleted
memory. Hidden underneath all of those junk sprites and garbled graphics were
nine more dots, worth ten points each. I couldn’t see them, but I had their
locations memorized. I quickly found and ate all nine, gaining 90 more points.
Then I turned and ran into the nearest ghost—Clyde—and committed Pacicide,
dying for the first time in the game. Pac-Man froze and withered into
nothingness with an extended beeewup.
Each time Pac-Man died on this final maze, the nine hidden dots reappeared
on the deformed right half of the screen. So to achieve the game’s maximum

possible score, I had to find and eat each of those dots five more times, once
with each of my five remaining lives.
I did my best not to think about Aech, who I knew must be holding the Jade
Key at that very moment. Right now, he was probably reading whatever clue was
etched into its surface.
I pulled the joystick to the right, weaving through the digital debris one final
time. I could have done it blindfolded by now. I fish-hooked around Pinky to
grab the two dots near the bottom, then another three in the center, and then the
last four near the top.
I’d done it. I had the new high score: 3,333,360 points. A perfect game.
I took my hands off the controls and watched as all four ghosts converged on
Pac-Man. GAME OVER flashed in the center of the maze.
I waited. Nothing happened. After a few seconds, the game’s attract screen
came back up, showing the four ghosts, their names, and their nicknames.
My gaze shot to the quarter sitting on the edge of the marquee brace. Earlier it
had been welded in place, unmovable. But now it tumbled forward and fell endover-end, landing directly in the palm of my avatar’s hand. Then it vanished, and
a message flashed on my display informing me that the quarter had
automatically been added to my inventory. When I tried to take it back out and
examine it, I found that I couldn’t. The quarter icon remained in my inventory. I
couldn’t take it out or drop it.
If the quarter had any magical properties, they weren’t revealed in its item
description, which was completely empty. To learn anything more about the
quarter, I would have to cast a series of high-level divination spells on it. That
would take days and require a lot of expensive spell components, and even then
there was no guarantee the spells would tell me anything.
But at the moment, I was having a hard time caring all that much about the
mystery of the undroppable quarter. All I could think about was that Aech and
Art3mis had now both beaten me to the Jade Key. And getting the high score on
this Pac-Man game on Archaide obviously hadn’t gotten me any closer to
finding it myself. I really had been wasting my time here.
I headed back up to the planet’s surface. Just as I was sitting down in the
Vonnegut’s cockpit, an e-mail from Aech arrived in my inbox. I felt my pulse
quicken when I saw its subject line: Payback Time.
Holding my breath, I opened the message and read it:
Dear Parzival,
You and I are officially even now, got that? I consider my debt to you

hereby paid in full.
Better hurry. The Sixers must already be on their way there.
Good luck,
Aech
Below his signature was an image file he’d attached to the message. It was a
high-resolution scan of the instruction manual cover for the text adventure game
Zork—the version released in 1980 by Personal Software for the TRS-80 Model
III.
I’d played and solved Zork once, a long time ago, back during the first year of
the Hunt. But I’d also played hundreds of other classic text adventure games that
year, including all of Zork’s sequels, and so most of the details of the game had
now faded in my memory. Most old text adventure games were pretty selfexplanatory, so I’d never actually bothered to read the Zork instruction manual. I
now knew that this had a been a colossal mistake.
On the manual’s cover was a painting depicting a scene from the game. A
swashbuckling adventurer wearing armor and a winged helmet stood with a
glowing blue sword raised over his head, preparing to strike a troll cowering
before him. The adventurer clutched several treasures in his other hand, and
more treasures lay at his feet, scattered among human bones. A dark, fanged
creature lurked just behind the hero, glowering malevolently.
All of this was in the painting’s foreground, but my eyes had instantly locked
on what was in the background: a large white house, with its front door and
windows all boarded up.
A dwelling long neglected.
I stared at the image a few more seconds, just long enough to curse myself for
not making the connection on my own, months ago. Then I fired the Vonnegut’s
engines and set a course for another planet in Sector Seven, not far from
Archaide. It was small world called Frobozz that was home to a detailed recreation of the game Zork.
It was also, I now knew, the hiding place of the Jade Key.

Frobozz was located in a group of several hundred rarely visited worlds
known as the XYZZY Cluster. These planets all dated back to the early days of
the OASIS, and each one re-created the environment of some classic text
adventure game or MUD (multi-user dungeon). Each of these worlds was a kind
of shrine—an interactive tribute to the OASIS’s earliest ancestors.
Text adventure games (often referred to as “interactive fiction” by modern
scholars) used text to create the virtual environment the player inhabited. The
game program provided you with a simple written description of your
surroundings, then asked what you wanted to do next. To move around or
interact with your virtual surroundings, you keyed in text commands telling the
game what you wanted your avatar to do. These instructions had to be very
simple, usually composed of just two or three words, such as “go south” or “get
sword.” If a command was too complex, the game’s simple parsing engine
wouldn’t be able to understand it. By reading and typing text, you made your
way through the virtual world, collecting treasure, fighting monsters, avoiding
traps, and solving puzzles until you finally reached the end of the game.
The first text adventure game I’d ever played was called Colossal Cave, and
initially the text-only interface had seemed incredibly simple and crude to me.
But after playing for a few minutes, I quickly became immersed in the reality
created by the words on the screen. Somehow, the game’s simple two-sentence
room descriptions were able to conjure up vivid images in my mind’s eye.
Zork was one of the earliest and most famous text adventure games.
According to my grail diary, I’d played the game through to the end just once, all
in one day, over four years ago. Since then, in a shocking display of unforgivable
ignorance, I’d somehow forgotten two very important details about the game:
1. Zork began with your character standing outside a shuttered white house.
2. Inside the living room of that white house there was a trophy case.

To complete the game, every treasure you collected had to be returned to the
living room and placed inside the trophy case.
Finally, the rest of the Quatrain made sense.
The captain conceals the Jade Key
in a dwelling long neglected
But you can only blow the whistle
once the trophies are all collected
Decades ago, Zork and its sequels had all been licensed and re-created inside
the OASIS as stunning three-dimensional immersive simulations all located on
the planet Frobozz, which was named after a character in the Zork universe. So
the dwelling long neglected—the one I’d been trying to locate for the past six
months—had been sitting right out in the open on Frobozz this entire time.
Hiding in plain sight.

I checked the ship’s navigational computer. Traveling at light speed, it would
take me just over fifteen minutes to reach Frobozz. There was a good chance the
Sixers would beat me there. If they did, there would probably already be a small
armada of Sixer gunships waiting in orbit around the planet when I dropped out
of light speed. I would have to fight my way through them to reach the surface,
and then either lose them, or try to find the Jade Key with them still breathing
down my neck. Not a good scenario.
Luckily, I had a backup plan. My Ring of Teleportation. It was one of the most
valuable magic items in my inventory, looted from the hoard of a red dragon I’d
slain on Gygax. The ring allowed my avatar to teleport once a month, to any
location in the OASIS. I only used it in dire emergencies as a last-ditch means of
escape, or when I needed to get somewhere in a big hurry. Like right now.
I quickly programmed the Vonnegut’s onboard computer to autopilot the ship
to Frobozz. I instructed it to activate its cloaking device as soon as it dropped out
of hyperspace, then locate me on the planet’s surface and land somewhere
nearby. If I was lucky, the Sixers wouldn’t detect my ship and blast it out of the
sky before it could reach me. If they did, I’d be stuck on Frobozz with no way to
leave, while the entire Sixer army closed in on me.
I engaged the Vonnegut’s autopilot, then activated my Ring of Teleportation
by speaking the command word, “Brundell.” When the ring began to glow, I said
the name of the planet where I wished to teleport. A world map of Frobozz
appeared on my display. It was a large world, and like the planet Middletown, its

surface was covered with hundreds of identical copies of the same simulation—
in this case, re-creations of the Zork playing field. There were 512 copies of it, to
be exact, which meant there were 512 white houses, spaced out evenly across the
planet’s surface. I should be able to obtain the Jade Key at any one of them, so I
selected one of the copies at random on the map. My ring emitted a blinding
flash of light, and a split second later my avatar was there, standing on the
surface of Frobozz.
I opened my grail diary and located my original notes on how to solve Zork.
Then I pulled up a map of the game’s playing field and placed it in the corner of
my display.
Surveying the skies, I didn’t see any sign of the Sixers, but that didn’t mean
they hadn’t already arrived. Sorrento and his underlings had probably just
teleported to one of the other playing fields. Everybody knew that the Sixers had
already been camped out in Sector Seven, waiting for this moment. As soon as
they saw Aech’s score increase, they would have used Fyndoro’s Tablet of
Finding and learned that he was currently on Frobozz. Which meant the entire
Sixer armada would already be on its way here. So I needed to get to the key as
quickly as possible, then get the hell of out Dodge.
I took a look around. My surroundings were eerily familiar.
The opening text description in the game Zork read as follows:
WEST OF HOUSE
You are standing in an open field west of a white house, with a boarded
front door. There is a small mailbox here.
>
My avatar now stood in that open field, just west of the white house. The front
door of the old Victorian mansion was boarded up, and there was a mailbox just
a few yards away from me, at the end of the walkway leading to the house. The
house was surrounded by a dense forest, and beyond it I saw a range of jagged
mountain peaks. Glancing off to my left, I spotted a path leading to the north,
right where I knew it should be.
I ran around to the back of the house. I found a small window there, slightly
ajar, and I forced it open and climbed inside. As expected, I found myself in the
kitchen. A wooden table sat in the center of the room, and on it rested a long
brown sack and a bottle of water. A chimney stood nearby, and a staircase led up
to the attic. A hallway off to my left led to the living room. Just like the game.
But the kitchen also contained things that weren’t mentioned in the game’s
text description of this room. A stove, a refrigerator, several wooden chairs, a

sink, and a few rows of kitchen cabinets. I opened the fridge. It was full of junk
food. Fossilized pizza, snack puddings, lunch meat, and a wide array of
condiment packets. I checked the cupboards. They were filled with canned and
dry goods. Rice, pasta, soup.
And cereal.
One entire cupboard was crammed with boxes of vintage breakfast cereals,
most of which had been discontinued before I’d been born. Fruit Loops,
Honeycombs, Lucky Charms, Count Chocula, Quisp, Frosted Flakes. And
hidden way at the back was a lone box of Cap’n Crunch. Printed clearly on the
front of it were the words FREE TOY WHISTLE INSIDE!
The captain conceals the Jade Key.
I dumped the contents of the box out on the counter, scattering golden cereal
nuggets everywhere. Then I spotted it—a small plastic whistle encased in a clear
cellophane envelope. I tore off the cellophane and held the whistle in my hand. It
was yellow in color, with the cartoon face of Cap’n Crunch molded on one side
and a small dog on the other. The words CAP’N CRUNCH BO’SUN WHISTLE were
embossed on either side.
I raised the whistle to my avatar’s lips and blew into it. But the whistle
emitted no sound, and nothing happened.
You can only blow the whistle once the trophies are all collected.
I pocketed the whistle and opened the sack on the kitchen table. I saw a clove
of garlic inside, and I added it to my inventory. Then I ran west, into the living
room. The floor was covered with a large Oriental rug. Antique furniture, the
kind I’d seen in films from the 1940s, was positioned around the room. A
wooden door with odd characters carved into its surface was set into the west
wall. And against the opposite wall there was a beautiful glass trophy case. It
was empty. A battery-powered lantern sat on top of the case, and a shining sword
was mounted on the wall directly above it.
I took the sword and the lantern, then rolled up the Oriental rug, uncovering
the trapdoor I already knew was hidden underneath. I opened it, revealing a
staircase that led down into a darkened cellar.
I turned on the lamp. As I descended the staircase, my sword began to glow.

I continued to refer to the Zork notes in my grail diary, which reminded me
exactly how to make my way through the game’s labyrinth of rooms,
passageways, and puzzles. I collected all nineteen of the game’s treasures as I
went, returning repeatedly to the living room in the white house to place them in
the trophy case, a few at a time. Along the way, I had to do battle with several

NPCs: a troll, a Cyclops, and a really annoying thief. As for the legendary grue,
lurking in the dark, waiting to dine on my flesh—I simply avoided him.
Aside from the Cap’n Crunch whistle hidden in the kitchen, I found no
surprises or deviations from the original game. To solve this immersive threedimensional version of Zork, I simply had to perform the exact same actions
required to solve the original text-based game. By running at top speed and by
never stopping to sightsee or second-guess myself, I managed to complete the
game in twenty-two minutes.
Shortly after I collected the last of the game’s nineteen treasures, a tiny brass
bauble, a notice flashed in my display informing me that the Vonnegut had
arrived outside. The autopilot had just landed the ship in the field to the west of
the white house. Its cloaking device was still engaged and its shields were up. If
the Sixers were already here, in orbit around the planet, I was hoping they hadn’t
spotted my ship.
I ran back to the living room of the white house one last time and placed the
final treasure inside the trophy case. Just as in the original game, a map appeared
inside the case, directing me to a hidden barrow that marked the end of the
game. But I wasn’t concerned with the map or with finishing the game. All of
the “trophies” were now “collected” in the case, so I took out the Cap’n Crunch
whistle. It had three holes across the top, and I covered the third one to generate
the 2600-hertz tone that had made this whistle famous in the annals of hacker
history. Then I blew one clear, shrill note.
The whistle transformed into a small key, and my score on the scoreboard
increased by 18,000 points.
I was back in second place, a mere 1,000 points ahead of Aech.
A second later, the entire Zork simulation reset itself. The nineteen items in
the trophy case vanished, returning to their original locations, and the rest of the
house and the game’s playing field returned to the same state in which I’d found
them.
As I stared at the key in the palm of my hand, I felt a brief jolt of panic. The
key was silver, not the milky green color of jade. But when I turned the key over
and examined it more closely, I saw that it actually appeared to be wrapped in
silver foil, like a stick of gum or a bar of chocolate. I carefully peeled the
wrapper away, and a key made of polished green stone was revealed inside.
The Jade Key.
And just like the Copper Key, I saw that it had a clue etched into its surface:
Continue your quest by taking the test

I reread it several times, but had no immediate revelations as to its meaning,
so I placed the key in my inventory, then examined the wrapper. It was silver foil
on one side and white paper on the other. I didn’t see any markings on either
side.
Just then, I heard the muffled roar of approaching spacecraft and knew it must
be the Sixers. It sounded like they were here in force.
I pocketed the wrapper and ran out of the house. Overhead, thousands of Sixer
gunships filled the sky like an angry swarm of metal wasps. The ships were
separating into small groups as they descended, heading off in different
directions, as if to blanket the entire surface of the planet.
I didn’t think the Sixers would be foolish enough to try to barricade all 512
instances of the white house. That strategy had worked for them on Ludus, but
only for a few hours, and they’d only had one location to barricade. The entire
planet of Frobozz was in a PvP zone, and both magic and technology functioned
here, which meant that all bets were off. There would be hordes of gunters
arriving here soon, armed to the teeth, and if the Sixers tried to keep all of them
at bay, it would mean war on a scale never before seen in the history of the
OASIS.
As I continued running across the field and up the ramp of my ship, I spotted a
large squadron of gunships, about a hundred or so, descending from the sky
directly above my location. They appeared to be headed straight for me.
Max had already powered up the Vonnegut’s engines, so I shouted for him to
lift off as soon as I was aboard. When I reached the cockpit controls, I threw the
throttle wide open, and the descending swarm of Sixer gunships banked hard to
follow me. As my ship blasted its way skyward, I began to take heavy fire from
several directions. But I was lucky. My ship was fast, and my shields were topof-the-line, so they managed to hold up long enough for me to reach orbit. But
they failed a few seconds later, and the Vonnegut’s hull suffered an alarming
amount of damage in the handful of seconds it took me to make the jump to light
speed.
It was a close call. The bastards almost got me.

My ship was in bad shape, so instead of returning directly to my stronghold, I
headed to Joe’s Garage, an orbital starship repair shop over in Sector Ten. Joe’s
was an honest NPC-operated establishment, with reasonable rates and lightningfast service. I used them whenever the Vonnegut needed repairs or upgrades.
While Joe and his boys worked on my ship, I sent Aech a brief e-mail to say
thanks. I told him that whatever debt he felt he owed me was now most

definitely paid in full. I also copped to being a colossally insensitive, selfcentered asshole and begged him to forgive me.
As soon as the repairs to my ship were finished, I headed back to my
stronghold. Then I spent the rest of the day glued to the newsfeeds. The word
about Frobozz was out, and every gunter with the means had already teleported
there. Thousands of others were arriving by spacecraft every minute, to do battle
with the Sixers and secure their own copy of the Jade Key.
The newsfeeds were airing live coverage of the hundreds of large-scale battles
breaking out on Frobozz, around nearly every instance of the “dwelling long
neglected.” The big gunter clans had once again banded together to launch a
coordinated attack on the Sixers’ forces. It was the beginning of what would
come to be known as the Battle of Frobozz, and casualties were already
mounting on both sides.
I also kept a close eye on the Scoreboard, waiting to see evidence that the
Sixers had begun to collect copies of the Jade Key while their forces held the
opposition at bay. As I feared, the next score to increase was the one beside
Sorrento’s IOI employee number. It jumped 17,000 points, moving him into
fourth place.
Now that the Sixers knew exactly where and how to obtain the Jade Key, I
expected to see their other avatars’ scores begin to jump as Sorrento’s underlings
followed his lead. But to my surprise, the next avatar to snag the Jade Key was
none other than Shoto. He did it less than twenty minutes after Sorrento.
Somehow, Shoto had managed to evade the hordes of Sixers currently
swarming all over the planet, enter an instance of the white house, collect all
nineteen of the required treasures, and obtain his copy of the key.
I continued to watch the Scoreboard, expecting to see his brother Daito’s score
increase as well. But that never happened.
Instead, a few minutes after Shoto obtained his copy of the key, Daito’s name
disappeared from the Scoreboard entirely. There was only one possible
explanation: Daito had just been killed.

Over the next twelve hours, chaos continued to reign on Frobozz as every
gunter in the OASIS scrambled to reach the planet and join the fray.
The Sixers had dispersed their grand army across the globe in a bold attempt
to blockade all 512 copies of the Zork playing field. But their forces, as vast and
well-equipped as they were, were spread far too thin this time. Only seven more
of their avatars managed to obtain the Jade Key that day. And when the gunter
clans began their coordinated attack on the Sixers’ forces, the “boobs in blue”
began to suffer heavy casualties and were forced to pull back.
Within a matter of hours, the Sixer high command decided to deploy a new
strategy. It had quickly become obvious that they wouldn’t be able to maintain
over five hundred different blockades or fend off the massive influx of gunters.
So they regrouped all of their forces around ten adjacent instances of the Zork
playing field near the planet’s south pole. They installed powerful force shields
over each of them and stationed armored battalions outside the shield walls.
This scaled-down strategy worked, and the Sixers’ forces proved sufficient to
hold those ten locations and prevent any other gunters from getting inside (and
there wasn’t much reason for other gunters to try, since over five hundred other
instances of Zork now stood wide open and unprotected). Now that the Sixers
could operate undisturbed, they basically formed ten lines of avatars outside
each white house and began to run them through the process of obtaining the
Jade Key, one after another. Everyone could plainly see what they were doing,
because the digits beside each IOI employee number on the Scoreboard began to
increase by 15,000 points.
At the same time, hundreds of gunter scores were increasing as well. Now that
the location of the Jade Key was public knowledge, deciphering the Quatrain
and figuring out how to obtain the key was relatively easy. It was there for the
taking to anyone who had already cleared the First Gate.
As the Battle of Frobozz drew to a close, the rankings on the Scoreboard stood
like this:

HIGH SCORES:
1. Art3mis
2. Parzival
3. Aech
4. IOI-655321
5. Shoto
6. IOI-643187
7. IOI-621671
8. IOI-678324
9. IOI-637330
10. IOI-699423

129,000
128,000
127,000
122,000
122,000
120,000
120,000
120,000
120,000
120,000

Even though Shoto had matched Sorrento’s score of 122,000 points, Sorrento
had achieved that score first, which must be the reason he’d remained in the
higher slot. The relatively small point bonuses Art3mis, Aech, Shoto, and I had
received for being the first to reach the Copper and Jade keys were what kept our
names in the hallowed “High Five” slots. Sorrento had now earned one of these
bonuses too. Seeing his IOI employee number above Shoto’s name made me
cringe.
Scrolling down, I saw that the Scoreboard was now over five thousand names
long, with more being added every hour as new avatars finally managed to
defeat Acererak at Joust and collect their own instance of the Copper Key.
No one on the message boards seemed to know what had happened to Daito,
but the common assumption was that he’d been killed by the Sixers during the
first few minutes of the Battle of Frobozz. Rumors about exactly how he had
died were running rampant, but no one had actually been witness to his demise.
Except for maybe Shoto, and he’d vanished. I sent him a few chat requests, but
got no reply. Like me, I assumed he was focusing all of his energy on finding the
Second Gate before the Sixers did.

I sat in my stronghold, staring at the Jade Key and reciting the words etched into
its spine, over and over, like a maddening mantra:
Continue your quest by taking the test
Continue your quest by taking the test

Continue your quest by taking the test
Yes, but what test? What test was I supposed to take? The Kobayashi Maru?
The Pepsi Challenge? Could the clue have been any more vague?
I reached under my visor and rubbed my eyes in frustration. I decided I
needed to take a break and get some sleep. I pulled up my avatar’s inventory and
placed the Jade Key back inside. As I did, I noticed the silver foil wrapper in the
inventory slot beside it—the wrapper that had covered the Jade Key when it first
appeared in my hand.
I knew the secret to deciphering the riddle must involve the wrapper in some
way, but I still couldn’t sort out how. I wondered if it might be a reference to
Willy Wonka and the Chocolate Factory, but then decided against it. There
hadn’t been any golden ticket inside the wrapper. It must have some other
purpose or meaning.
I stared at the wrapper and pondered this until I could no longer keep my eyes
open. Then I logged out and went to sleep.
A few hours later, at 6:12 a.m. OST, I was jolted awake by the gut-wrenching
sound of my Scoreboard alarm alerting me that one of the top rankings had
changed again.
Filled with a growing sense of dread, I logged in and pulled up the
Scoreboard, unsure of what to expect. Maybe Art3mis had finally cleared Gate
Two? Or perhaps Aech or Shoto had achieved that honor.
But all of their scores remained unchanged. To my horror, I saw that it was
Sorrento’s score that had increased, by 200,000 points. And two gate icons now
appeared beside it.
Sorrento had just become the first person to find and clear the Second Gate.
As a result, his avatar now stood in first place, at the top of the Scoreboard.
I sat there frozen, staring at Sorrento’s employee number, silently weighing
the repercussions of what had just happened.
Upon exiting the gate, Sorrento would have been given a clue as to the
location of the Crystal Key. The key that would open the third and final gate. So
now the Sixers were the only ones who possessed that clue. Which meant they
were now closer to finding Halliday’s Easter egg than anyone had ever been.
I suddenly felt ill, and I was also having a difficult time breathing. I realized I
must be having some sort of panic attack. A total and complete freak-out. A
massive mental meltdown. Whatever you want to call it. I went a little nuts.
I tried calling Aech, but he didn’t pick up. Either he was still pissed off at me,
or he had other, more pressing matters to attend to. I was about to call Shoto, but
then I remembered that his brother’s avatar had just been killed. He probably

wasn’t in a very receptive mood.
I considered flying to Benatar to try to get Art3mis to talk to me, but then I
came to my senses. She’d had the Jade Key in her possession for several days,
and she still hadn’t been able to clear the Second Gate. Learning that the Sixers
had done it in less than twenty-four hours had probably driven her into a
psychotic rage. Or maybe a catatonic stupor. She probably didn’t feel like talking
to anyone right now, least of all me.
I tried calling her anyway. As usual, she didn’t answer.
I was so desperate to hear a familiar voice that I resorted to talking to Max. In
my current state, even his glib computer-generated voice was somehow
comforting. Of course, it didn’t take long for Max to run out of preprogrammed
replies; and when he started to repeat himself the illusion that I was talking to
another person was shattered, and I felt even more alone. You know you’ve
totally screwed up your life when your whole world turns to shit and the only
person you have to talk to is your system agent software.
I couldn’t go back to sleep, so I stayed up watching the newsfeeds and
scanning the gunter message boards. The Sixer armada remained on Frobozz,
and their avatars were still farming copies of the Jade Key.
Sorrento had obviously learned from his previous mistake. Now that the
Sixers alone knew the location of the Second Gate, they weren’t going to be
stupid enough to reveal its location to the world by trying to barricade it with
their armada. But they were still taking full advantage of the situation. As the
day progressed, the Sixers continued to walk additional avatars through the
Second Gate. After Sorrento made it through, another ten Sixers cleared it during
the following twenty-four hours. As each Sixer score increased by 200,000
points, Art3mis, Aech, Shoto, and I were all pushed farther and farther down the
Scoreboard until we’d been knocked out of the top ten entirely, and the
Scoreboard’s main page displayed nothing but IOI employee numbers.
The Sixers now ruled the roost.
Then, when I was sure things couldn’t possibly get any worse, they did. They
got much, much worse. Two days after he cleared the Second Gate, Sorrento’s
score jumped another 30,000 points, indicating that he had just acquired the
Crystal Key.
I sat there in my stronghold, staring at the monitors, watching all of this
unfold in stunned horror. There was no denying it. The end of the contest was at
hand. And it wasn’t going to end like I’d always thought it would, with some
noble, worthy gunter finding the egg and winning the prize. I’d been kidding
myself for the past five and a half years. We all had. This story was not going to
have a happy ending. The bad guys were going to win.

I spent the next twenty-four hours in a frantic funk, obsessively checking the
Scoreboard every five seconds, expecting the end to come at any moment.
Sorrento, or one of his many “Halliday experts,” had obviously been able to
decipher the riddle and locate the Second Gate. But even though the proof was
right there on the Scoreboard, I still had a hard time believing it. Up until now,
the Sixers had only made progress by tracking Art3mis, Aech, or me. How had
those same clueless asshats found the Second Gate on their own? Maybe they’d
just gotten lucky. Or perhaps they’d discovered some new and innovative way to
cheat. How else could they have solved the riddle so quickly, when Art3mis
hadn’t been able to do it with several days’ head start?
My brain felt like hammered Play-Doh. I couldn’t make any sense of the clue
printed on the Jade Key. I was completely out of ideas. Even lame ones. I didn’t
know what to do or where to look next.
As the night went on, the Sixers continued to acquire copies of the Crystal
Key. Each time one of their scores increased it was like a knife in my heart. But I
couldn’t make myself stop checking the Scoreboard. I was utterly transfixed.
I felt myself inching toward complete hopelessness. My efforts over the past
five years had been for nothing. I’d foolishly underestimated Sorrento and the
Sixers. And I was about to pay the ultimate price for my hubris. Those soulless
corporate lackeys were closing in on the egg at this very moment. I could sense
it, with every fiber of my being.
I’d already lost Art3mis, and now I was going to lose the contest, too.
I’d already decided what I was going to do when it happened. First, I would
choose one of the kids in my official fan club, someone with no money and a
first-level newbie avatar, and give her every item I owned. Then I would activate
the self-destruct sequence on my stronghold and sit in my command center while
the whole place went up in a massive thermonuclear explosion. My avatar would
die and GAME OVER would appear in the center of my display. Then I would rip
off my visor and leave my apartment for the first time in six months. I would
ride the elevator up to the roof. Or maybe I would even take the stairs. Get a
little exercise.
There was an arboretum on the roof of my apartment building. I had never
visited it, but I’d seen photos and admired the view via webcam. A transparent
Plexiglas barrier had been installed around the ledge to keep people from
jumping, but it was a joke. At least three determined individuals had managed to
climb over it since I’d moved in.
I would sit up there and breathe the unfiltered city air for a while, feeling the
wind on my skin. Then I would scale the barrier and hurl myself over the side.
This was my current plan.

I was trying to decide what tune I should whistle as I plummeted to my death
when my phone rang. It was Shoto. I wasn’t in the mood to talk, so I let his call
roll to vidmail, then watched as Shoto recorded his message. It was brief. He
said he needed to come to my stronghold to give me something. Something
Daito had left to me in his will.
When I returned his call to arrange a meeting, I could tell Shoto was an
emotional wreck. His quiet voice was filled with pain, and the depth of his
despair was apparent on the features of his avatar’s face. He seemed utterly
despondent. In even worse shape than I was.
I asked Shoto why his brother had bothered to make out a “will” for his avatar,
instead of just leaving his possessions in Shoto’s care. Then Daito could simply
create a new avatar and reclaim the items his brother was holding for him. But
Shoto told me that his brother would not be creating a new avatar. Not now, or
ever. When I asked why, he promised to explain when he saw me in person.

Max alerted me when Shoto arrived an hour or so later. I granted his ship
clearance to enter Falco’s airspace and told him to park in my hangar.
Shoto’s vessel was a large interplanetary trawler named the Kurosawa,
modeled after a ship called the Bebop in the classic anime series Cowboy Bebop.
Daito and Shoto had used it as their mobile base of operations for as long as I’d
known them. The ship was so big that it barely fit through my hangar doors.
I was standing on the runway to greet Shoto as he emerged from the
Kurosawa. He was dressed in black mourning robes, and his face bore the same
inconsolable expression I’d seen when we spoke on the phone.
“Parzival-san,” he said, bowing low.
“Shoto-san.” I returned the bow respectfully, then stretched out my palm, a
gesture he recognized from the time we’d spent questing together. Grinning, he
reached out and slipped me some skin. But then his dark expression immediately
resurfaced. This was the first time I’d seen Shoto since the quest we’d shared on
Tokusatsu (not counting those “Daisho Energy Drink” commercials he and his
brother appeared in), and his avatar seemed to be a few inches taller than I
remembered.
I led him up to one of my stronghold’s rarely used “sitting rooms,” a recreation of the living room set from Family Ties. Shoto recognized the decor and
nodded his silent approval. Then, ignoring the furniture, he seated himself in the
center of the floor. He sat seiza-style, folding his legs under his thighs. I did the
same, positioning myself so that our avatars faced each other. We sat in silence
for a while. When Shoto was finally ready to speak, he kept his eyes on the floor.
“The Sixers killed my brother last night,” he said, almost whispering.
At first, I was too stunned to reply. “You mean they killed his avatar?” I asked,
even though I could already tell that wasn’t what he meant.
Shoto shook his head. “No. They broke into his apartment, pulled him out of
his haptic chair, and threw him off his balcony. He lived on the forty-third floor.”
Shoto opened a browser window in the air beside us. It displayed a Japanese

newsfeed article. I tapped it with my index finger, and the Mandarax software
translated the text to English. The headline was ANOTHER OTAKU SUICIDE. The
brief article below said that a young man, Toshiro Yoshiaki, age twenty-two, had
jumped to his death from his apartment, located on the forty-third floor of a
converted hotel in Shinjuku, Tokyo, where he lived alone. I saw a school photo
of Toshiro beside the article. He was a young Japanese man with long, unkempt
hair and bad skin. He didn’t look anything like his OASIS avatar.
When Shoto saw that I’d finished reading, he closed the window. I hesitated a
moment before asking, “Are you sure he didn’t really commit suicide? Because
his avatar had been killed?”
“No,” Shoto said. “Daito did not commit seppuku. I’m sure of it. The Sixers
broke into his apartment while we were engaged in combat with them on
Frobozz. That’s how they were able to defeat his avatar. By killing him, in the
real world.”
“I’m sorry, Shoto.” I didn’t know what else to say. I knew he was telling the
truth.
“My real name is Akihide,” he said. “I want you to know my true name.”
I smiled, then bowed, briefly pressing my forehead to the floor. “I appreciate
your trusting me with your true name,” I said. “My true name is Wade.” I could
no longer see the point in keeping secrets.
“Thank you, Wade,” Shoto said, returning the bow.
“You’re welcome, Akihide.”
He was silent for a moment; then he cleared his throat and began to talk about
Daito. The words poured out of him. It was obvious he needed to talk to
someone about what had happened. About what he’d lost.
“Daito’s real name was Toshiro Yoshiaki. I didn’t even know that until last
night, until I saw the news article.”
“But … I thought you were his brother?” I’d always assumed that Daito and
Shoto lived together. That they shared an apartment or something.
“My relationship with Daito is difficult to explain.” He stopped to clear his
throat. “We were not brothers. Not in real life. Just in the OASIS. Do you
understand? We only knew each other online. I never actually met him.” He
slowly raised his eyes to meet my gaze, to see if I was judging him.
I reached out and rested a hand on his shoulder. “Believe me, Shoto. I
understand. Aech and Art3mis are my two best friends, and I’ve never met either
of them in real life either. In fact, you are one of my closest friends too.”
He bowed his head. “Thank you.” I could tell by his voice that he was crying
now.
“We’re gunters,” I said, trying to fill the awkward silence. “We live here, in

the OASIS. For us, this is the only reality that has any meaning.”
Akihide nodded. A few moments later he continued to talk.
He told me how he and Toshiro had met, six years ago, when they were both
enrolled in an OASIS support group for hikikomori, young people who had
withdrawn from society and chosen to live in total isolation. Hikikomori locked
themselves in a room, read manga, and cruised the OASIS all day, relying on
their families to bring them food. There had been hikikomori in Japan since back
before the turn of the century, but their number had skyrocketed after the hunt
for Halliday’s Easter egg began. Millions of young men and women all over the
country had locked themselves away from the world. They sometimes called
these children the “missing millions.”
Akihide and Toshiro became best friends and spent almost every day hanging
out together in the OASIS. When the hunt for Halliday’s Easter egg began,
they’d immediately decided to join forces and search for it together. They made
a perfect team, because Toshiro was a prodigy at videogames, while the much
younger Akihide was well versed in American pop culture. Akihide’s
grandmother had attended school in the United States, and both of his parents
had been born there, so Akihide had been raised on American movies and
television, and he’d grown up learning to speak English and Japanese equally
well.
Akihide and Toshiro’s mutual love of samurai movies served as the inspiration
for their avatars’ names and appearances. Shoto and Daito had grown so close
that they were now like brothers, so when they created their new gunter
identities, they decided that in the OASIS they were brothers, from that moment
on.
After Shoto and Daito cleared the First Gate and became famous, they gave
several interviews with the media. They kept their identities a secret, but they
did reveal that they were both Japanese, which made them instant celebrities in
Japan. They began to endorse Japanese products and had a cartoon and a liveaction TV series based on their exploits. At the height of their fame, Shoto had
suggested to Daito that perhaps it was time for them to meet in person. Daito had
flown into a rage and stopped speaking to Shoto for several days. After that,
Shoto had never suggested it again.
Eventually, Shoto worked his way up to telling me how Daito’s avatar had
died. The two of them had been aboard the Kurosawa, cruising between planets
in Sector Seven, when the Scoreboard informed them that Aech had obtained the
Jade Key. When that happened, they knew the Sixers would use Fyndoro’s
Tablet of Finding to pinpoint Aech’s exact location and that their ships would
soon be converging on it.

In preparation for this, Daito and Shoto had spent the past few weeks planting
microscopic tracking devices on the hulls of every Sixer gunship they could find.
Using these devices, they were able to follow the gunships when they all
abruptly changed course and headed for Frobozz.
As soon as Shoto and Daito learned that Frobozz was the Sixers’ destination,
they’d easily deciphered the meaning of the Quatrain. And by the time they
reached Frobozz, just a few minutes later, they’d already figured out what they
needed to do to obtain the Jade Key.
They landed the Kurosawa next to an instance of the white house that was still
deserted. Shoto ran inside to collect the nineteen treasures and get the key, while
Daito remained outside to stand guard. Shoto worked quickly, and he only had
two treasures left to collect when Daito informed him by comlink that ten Sixer
gunships were closing in on their location. He told his brother to hurry and
promised to hold off the enemy until Shoto had the Jade Key. Neither of them
knew if they’d have another chance to reach it.
As Shoto scrambled to get the last two treasures and place them in the trophy
case, he remotely activated one of the Kurosawa’s external cameras and used it
to record a short video of Daito’s confrontation with the approaching Sixers.
Shoto opened a window and played this video clip for me. But he averted his
eyes until it was over. He obviously had no desire to watch it again.
On the vidfeed, I saw Daito standing alone in the field beside the white house.
A small fleet of Sixer gunships was descending out of the sky, and they began to
fire their laser cannons as soon as they were within range. A hailstorm of fiery
red bolts began to rain down all around Daito. Behind him, in the distance, I
could see more Sixer gunships setting down, and each one was off-loading
squadrons of power-armored ground troops. Daito was surrounded.
The Sixers had obviously spotted the Kurosawa during its descent to the
planet’s surface, and they’d made killing the two samurai a priority.
Daito didn’t hesitate to use the ace up his sleeve. He pulled out the Beta
Capsule, held it aloft in his right hand, and activated it. His avatar instantly
changed into Ultraman, a glowing-eyed red-and-silver alien superhero. As his
avatar transformed, he also grew to a height of 156 feet.
The Sixer ground forces closing in on him froze in their tracks, staring up in
frightened awe as Ultraman Daito snatched two gunships out of the sky and
smashed them together, like a giant child playing with two tiny metal toys. He
dropped the flaming wreckage to the ground and began to swat other Sixer
gunships out of the sky like bothersome flies. The ships that escaped his deadly
grasp banked around and sprayed him with laser bolts and machine-gun fire, but
both deflected harmlessly off his armored alien skin. Daito let out a booming

laugh that echoed across the landscape. Then he made a cross with his arms,
intersecting at the wrists. A glowing energy beam blasted forth from his hands,
vaporizing half a dozen gunships unlucky enough to fly through its path. Daito
turned and swept the beam over the Sixer ground forces around him, frying them
like terrified ants under a magnifying glass.
Daito appeared to be enjoying himself immensely. So much so that he paid
little attention to the warning light embedded in the center of his chest, which
had now begun to flash bright red. This was a signal that his three minutes as
Ultraman had nearly elapsed and that his power was almost depleted. This time
limit was Ultraman’s primary weakness. If Daito failed to deactivate the Beta
Capsule and return to human form before his three minutes were up, his avatar
would die. But it was obvious that if he changed back into his human form right
now, in the middle of the massive Sixer onslaught, he’d be killed instantly too.
And Shoto would never be able to reach the ship.
I could see the Sixer troops around Daito screaming into their comlinks for
backup, and additional Sixer gunships were still arriving in droves. Daito was
blasting them out of the sky one at a time, with perfectly aimed bursts of his
specium ray. And with each blast he fired, the warning light on his chest pulsed
faster.
Then Shoto emerged from the white house and told his brother via comlink
that he’d acquired the Jade Key. In that same instant, the Sixer ground forces
spotted Shoto, and sensing a much easier target, they began to redirect their fire
at his avatar.
Shoto made a mad dash for the Kurosawa. When he activated the Boots of
Speed he was wearing, his avatar became a barely visible blur racing across the
open field. As Shoto ran, Daito repositioned his giant form to provide him with
as much cover as possible. Still firing energy blasts, he was able to keep the
Sixers at bay.
Then Daito’s voice broke in on the comlink. “Shoto!” he shouted. “I think
someone is here! Someone is inside—”
His voice cut off. At the same moment, his avatar froze, as if he’d been turned
to stone, and a log-out icon appeared directly over his head.
Logging out of your OASIS account while you were engaged in combat was
the same thing as committing suicide. During the log-out sequence, your avatar
froze in place for sixty seconds, during which time you were totally defenseless
and susceptible to attack. The log-out sequence was designed this way to prevent
avatars from using it as an easy way to escape a fight. You had to stand your
ground or retreat to a safe location before you could log out.
Daito’s log-out sequence had been engaged at the worst possible moment. As

soon as his avatar froze, he began to take heavy laser and gunfire from all
directions. The red warning light on his chest began to flash faster and faster
until it finally went solid red. When that happened, Daito’s giant form fell over
and collapsed. As he fell, he barely missed crushing Shoto and the Kurosawa. As
he hit the ground, his avatar’s body transformed and shrank back to its normal
size and appearance. Then it began to disappear altogether, slowly fading out of
existence. When Daito’s avatar vanished completely, it left behind a small pile of
spinning items on the ground—everything he’d been carrying in his inventory,
including the Beta Capsule. He was dead.
I saw another blur of motion on the vidfeed as Shoto ran back to collect
Daito’s items. Then he looped around and ran back aboard the Kurosawa. The
ship lifted off and blasted into orbit, taking heavy fire the entire way. I was
reminded of my own desperate escape from Frobozz. Luckily for Shoto, his
brother had wiped out most of the Sixer gunships in the vicinity, and
reinforcements had yet to arrive.
Shoto was able to reach orbit and escape by making the jump to light speed.
But just barely.

The video ended and Shoto closed the window.
“How do you think the Sixers found out where he lived?” I asked.
“I don’t know,” Shoto said. “Daito was careful. He covered his tracks.”
“If they found him, they might be able to find you, too,” I said.
“I know. I’ve taken precautions.”
“Good.”
Shoto removed the Beta Capsule from his inventory and held it out to me.
“Daito would have wanted you to have this.”
I held up a hand. “No, I think you should keep it. You might need it.”
Shoto shook his head. “I have all of his other items,” he said. “I don’t need
this. And I don’t want it.” He held the capsule out to me, insistent.
I took the artifact and examined it. It was a small metal cylinder, silver and
black in color, with a red activation button on its side. Its size and shape
reminded me of the lightsabers I owned. But lightsabers were a dime a dozen. I
had over fifty in my collection. There was only one Beta Capsule, and it was a
far more powerful weapon.
I raised the capsule with both hands and bowed. “Thank you, Shoto-san.”
“Thank you, Parzival,” he said, returning the bow. “Thank you for listening.”
He stood up slowly. Everything about his body language seemed to signal defeat.
“You haven’t given up yet, have you?” I asked.

“Of course not.” He straightened his body and gave me a dark smile. “But
finding the egg is no longer my goal. Now, I have a new quest. A far more
important one.”
“And that is?”
“Revenge.”
I nodded. Then I walked over and took down one of the samurai swords
mounted on the wall and presented it to Shoto. “Please,” I said. “Accept this gift.
To aid you in your new quest.”
Shoto took the sword and drew its ornate blade a few inches from the
scabbard. “A Masamune?” he asked, staring at the blade in wonder.
I nodded. “Yes. And it’s a plus-five Vorpal Blade, too.”
Shoto bowed again to show his gratitude. “Arigato.”
We rode the elevator back down to my hangar in silence. Just before he
boarded his ship, Shoto turned to me. “How long do you think it will take the
Sixers to clear the Third Gate?” he asked.
“I don’t know,” I said. “Hopefully, long enough for us to catch up with them.”
“It’s not over until the fat lady is singing, right?”
I nodded. “It’s not over until it’s over. And it’s not over yet.”

I figured it out later that night, a few hours after Shoto left my stronghold.
I was sitting in my command center, holding the Jade Key and endlessly
reciting the clue printed on its surface: “ ‘Continue your quest by taking the
test.’ ”
In my other hand, I held the silver foil wrapper. My eyes darted from the key
to the wrapper and back to the key again as I tried desperately to make the
connection between them. I’d been doing this for hours, and it wasn’t getting me
anywhere.
I sighed and put the key away, then laid the wrapper flat on the control panel
in front of me. I carefully smoothed out all of its folds and wrinkles. The
wrapper was square in shape, six inches long on each edge. Silver foil on one
side, dull white paper on the other.
I pulled up some image-analysis software and made a high-resolution scan of
both sides of the wrapper. Then I magnified both images on my display and
studied every micrometer. I couldn’t find any markings or writing anywhere, on
either side of the wrapper’s surface.
I was eating some corn chips at the time, so I was using voice commands to
operate the image-analysis software. I instructed it to demagnify the scan of the
wrapper and center the image on my display. As I did this, it reminded me of a
scene in Blade Runner, where Harrison Ford’s character, Deckard, uses a similar
voice-controlled scanner to analyze a photograph.
I held up the wrapper and took another look at it. As the virtual light reflected
off its foil surface, I thought about folding the wrapper into a paper airplane and
sailing it across the room. That made me think of origami, which reminded me
of another moment from Blade Runner. One of the final scenes in the film.
And that was when it hit me.
“The unicorn,” I whispered.
The moment I said the word “unicorn” aloud, the wrapper began to fold on its
own, there in the palm of my hand. The square piece of foil bent itself in half

diagonally, creating a silver triangle. It continued to bend and fold itself into
smaller triangles and even smaller diamond shapes until at last it formed a fourlegged figure that then sprouted a tail, a head, and finally, a horn.
The wrapper had folded itself into a silver origami unicorn. One of the most
iconic images from Blade Runner.
I was already riding the elevator down to my hangar and shouting at Max to
prep the Vonnegut for takeoff.
Continue your quest by taking the test.
Now I knew exactly what “test” that line referred to, and where I needed to go
to take it. The origami unicorn had revealed everything to me.

Blade Runner was referenced in the text of Anorak’s Almanac no less than
fourteen times. It had been one of Halliday’s top ten all-time favorite films. And
the film was based on a novel by Philip K. Dick, one of Halliday’s favorite
authors. For these reasons, I’d seen Blade Runner over four dozen times and had
memorized every frame of the film and every line of dialogue.
As the Vonnegut streaked through hyperspace, I pulled the Director’s Cut of
Blade Runner up in a window on my display, then jumped ahead to review two
scenes in particular.
The movie, released in 1982, is set in Los Angeles in the year 2019, in a
sprawling, hyper-technological future that had never come to pass. The story
follows a guy named Rick Deckard, played by Harrison Ford. Deckard works as
a “blade runner,” a special type of cop who hunts down and kills replicants—
genetically engineered beings that are almost indistinguishable from real
humans. In fact, replicants look and act so much like real humans that the only
way a blade runner can spot one is by using a polygraph-like device called a
Voight-Kampff machine to test them.
Continue your quest by taking the test.
Voight-Kampff machines appear in only two scenes in the movie. Both of
those take place inside the Tyrell Building, an enormous double-pyramid
structure that houses the Tyrell Corporation, the company that manufactures the
replicants.
Re-creations of the Tyrell Building were among the most common structures
in the OASIS. Copies of it existed on hundreds of different planets, spread
throughout all twenty-seven sectors. This was because the code for the building
was included as a free built-in template in the OASIS WorldBuilder construction
software (along with hundreds of other structures borrowed from various
science-fiction films and television series). So for the past twenty-five years,

whenever someone used the WorldBuilder software to create a new planet inside
the OASIS, they could just select the Tyrell Building from a drop-down menu
and insert a copy of it into their simulation to help fill out the skyline of
whatever futuristic city or landscape they were coding. As a result, some worlds
had over a dozen copies of the Tyrell Building scattered across their surfaces. I
was currently hauling ass at light speed to the closest such world, a cyberpunkthemed planet in Sector Twenty-two called Axrenox.
If my suspicion was correct, every copy of the Tyrell Building on Axrenox
contained a hidden entrance into the Second Gate, through the Voight-Kampff
machines located inside. I wasn’t worried about running into the Sixers, because
there was no way they could have barricaded the Second Gate. Not with
thousands of copies of the Tyrell Building on hundreds of different worlds.
Once I reached Axrenox, finding a copy of the Tyrell Building took only a few
minutes. It was pretty hard to miss. A massive pyramid-shaped structure
covering several square kilometers at its base, it towered above most of the
structures adjacent to it.
I zeroed in on the first instance of the building I saw and headed straight for it.
My ship’s cloaking device was already engaged, and I left it activated when I set
the Vonnegut down on one of the Tyrell Building’s landing pads. Then I locked
the ship and activated all of its security systems, hoping they’d be enough to
keep it from getting stolen until I returned. Magic didn’t function here, so I
couldn’t just shrink the ship and put it in my pocket, and leaving your vessel
parked out in the open on a cyberpunk-themed world like Axrenox was like
asking for it to get ripped off. The Vonnegut would be a target for the first
leather-clad booster gang that spotted it.
I pulled up a map of the Tyrell Building template’s layout and used it to locate
a roof-access elevator a short distance from the platform where I’d landed. When
I reached the elevator, I punched in the default security code on the code pad and
crossed my fingers. I got lucky. The elevator doors hissed open. Whoever had
created this section of the Axrenox cityscape hadn’t bothered to reset the
security codes in the template. I took this as a good sign. It meant they’d
probably left everything else in the template at the default setting too.
As I rode the elevator down to the 440th floor, I powered on my armor and
drew my guns. Five security checkpoints stood between the elevator and the
room I needed to reach. Unless the template had been altered, fifty NPC Tyrell
security guard replicants would be standing between me and my destination.
The shooting started as soon as the elevator doors slid open. I had to kill seven
skin jobs before I could even make it out of the elevator car and into the hallway.
The next ten minutes played out like the climax of a John Woo movie. One of

the ones starring Chow Yun Fat, like Hard Boiled or The Killer. I switched both
of my guns to autofire and held down the triggers as I moved from one room to
the next, mowing down every NPC in my path. The guards returned fire, but
their bullets pinged harmlessly off my armor. I never ran out of ammo, because
each time I fired a round, a new round was teleported into the bottom of the clip.
My bullet bill this month was going to be huge.
When I finally reached my destination, I punched in another code and locked
the door behind me. I knew I didn’t have much time. Klaxons were blaring
throughout the building, and the thousands of NPC guards stationed on the floors
below were probably already on their way up here to find me.
My footsteps echoed as I entered the room. It was deserted except for a large
owl sitting on a golden perch. It blinked at me silently as I crossed the enormous
cathedral-like room, which was a perfect re-creation of the office of the Tyrell
Corporation’s founder, Eldon Tyrell. Every detail from the film had been
duplicated exactly. Polished stone floors. Giant marble pillars. The entire west
wall was a massive floor-to-ceiling window offering a breathtaking view of the
vast cityscape outside.
A long conference table stood beside the window. Sitting on top of it was a
Voight-Kampff machine. It was about the size of a briefcase, with a row of
unlabeled buttons on the front, next to three small data monitors.
When I walked up and sat down in front of the machine, it turned itself on. A
thin robotic arm extended a circular device that looked like a retinal scanner,
which locked into place directly level with the pupil of my right eye. A small
bellows was built into the side of the machine, and it began to rise and fall,
giving the impression that the device was breathing.
I glanced around, wondering if an NPC of Harrison Ford would appear, to ask
me the same questions he asked Sean Young in the movie. I’d memorized all of
her answers, just in case. But I waited a few seconds and nothing happened. The
machine’s bellows continued to rise and fall. In the distance, the security klaxons
continued to wail.
I took out the Jade Key. The instant I did, a panel slid open in the surface of
the Voight-Kampff machine, revealing a keyhole. I quickly inserted the Jade Key
and turned it. The machine and the key both vanished, and in their place, the
Second Gate appeared. It was a doorlike portal resting on top of the polished
conference table. Its edges glowed with the same milky jade color as the key,
and just like the First Gate, it appeared to lead into a vast field of stars.
I leapt up on the table and jumped inside.

I found myself standing just inside the entrance of a seedy-looking bowling alley
with disco-era decor. The carpet was a garish pattern of green and brown swirls,
and the molded plastic chairs were a faded orange color. The bowling lanes were
all empty and unlit. The place was deserted. There weren’t even any NPCs
behind the front counter or the snack bar. I wasn’t sure where I was supposed to
be until I saw MIDDLETOWN LANES printed in huge letters on the wall above the
bowling lanes.
At first, the only sound I heard was the low hum of the fluorescent lights
overhead. But then I noticed a series of faint electronic chirps emanating from
off to my left. I glanced in that direction and saw a darkened alcove just beyond
the snack bar. Over this cavelike entrance was a sign. Eight bright red neon
letters spelled out the words GAME ROOM.
There was a violent rush of wind, and the roar of what sounded like a
hurricane tearing through the bowling alley. My feet began to slide across the
carpet, and I realized that my avatar was being pulled toward the game room, as
if a black hole had opened up somewhere in there.
As the vacuum yanked me through the game room entrance, I spotted a dozen
videogames inside, all from the mid- to late ’80s. Crime Fighters, Heavy Barrel,
Vigilante, Smash TV. But I could now see that my avatar was being drawn
toward one game in particular, a game that stood alone at the very back of the
game room.
Black Tiger. Capcom, 1987.
A swirling vortex had opened in the center of the game’s monitor, and it was
sucking in bits of trash, paper cups, bowling shoes—everything that wasn’t
nailed down. Including me. As my avatar neared it, I reflexively reached out and
grabbed the joystick of a Time Pilot machine. My feet were instantly lifted off
the floor as the vortex continued to pull my avatar inexorably toward it.
At this point, I was actually grinning in anticipation. I was all prepared to pat
myself on the back, because I’d mastered Black Tiger long ago, during the first
year of the Hunt.
In the years prior to his death, when Halliday had been living in seclusion, the
only thing he’d posted on his website was a brief looping animation. It showed
his avatar, Anorak, sitting in his castle’s library, mixing potions and poring over
dusty spellbooks. This animation had run on a continuous loop for over a
decade, until it was finally replaced by the Scoreboard on the morning Halliday
died. In that animation, hanging on the wall behind Anorak, you could see a
large painting of a black dragon.
Gunters had filled countless message board threads arguing about the meaning

of the painting, about what the black dragon signified or whether it signified
anything at all. But I’d been sure of its meaning from the start.
In one of the earliest journal entries in Anorak’s Almanac, Halliday wrote that
whenever his parents would start screaming at each other, he would sneak out of
the house and ride his bike to the local bowling alley to play Black Tiger,
because it was a game he could beat on just one quarter. AA 23:234: “For one
quarter, Black Tiger lets me escape from my rotten existence for three glorious
hours. Pretty good deal.”
Black Tiger had first been released in Japan under its original title Burakku
Doragon. Black Dragon. The game had been renamed for its American release.
I’d deduced that the black dragon painting on the wall of Anorak’s study had
been a subtle hint that Burakku Doragon would play a key role in the Hunt. So
I’d studied the game until, like Halliday, I could reach the end on just one credit.
After that, I continued to play it every few months, just to keep from getting
rusty.
Now, it looked as if my foresight and diligence were about to pay off.
I was only able to hold on to the Time Pilot joystick for a few seconds. Then I
lost my grip and my avatar was sucked directly into the Black Tiger game’s
monitor.
Everything went black for a moment. Then I found myself in surreal
surroundings.
I was now standing inside a narrow dungeon corridor. On my left was a high
gray cobblestone wall with a mammoth dragon skull mounted on it. The wall
stretched up and up, vanishing into the shadows above. I couldn’t make out any
ceiling. The dungeon floor was composed of floating circular platforms arranged
end to end in a long line that stretched out into the darkness ahead. To my right,
beyond the platforms’ edge, there was nothing—just an endless, empty black
void.
I turned around, but there was no exit behind me. Just another high
cobblestone wall, stretching up into the infinite blackness overhead.
I looked down at my avatar’s body. I now looked exactly like the hero of
Black Tiger—a muscular, half-naked barbarian warrior dressed in an armored
thong and a horned helmet. My right arm disappeared in a strange metal
gauntlet, from which hung a long retractable chain with a spiked metal ball on
the end. My right hand deftly held three throwing daggers. When I hurled them
off in the black void at my right, three more identical daggers instantly appeared
in my hand. When I tried jumping, I discovered that I could leap thirty feet
straight up and land back on my feet with catlike grace.
Now I understood. I was about to play Black Tiger, all right. But not the fifty-

year-old, 2-D, side-scrolling platform game that I had mastered. I was now
standing inside a new, immersive, three-dimensional version of the game that
Halliday had created.
My knowledge of the original game’s mechanics, levels, and enemies would
definitely come in handy, but the game play was going to be completely
different, and it would require an entirely different set of skills.
The First Gate had placed me inside one of Halliday’s favorite movies, and
now the Second Gate had put me inside one of his favorite videogames. While I
was pondering the implication of this pattern, a message began to flash on my
display: GO!
I looked around. An arrow etched into the stone wall on my left pointed the
way forward. I stretched my arms and legs, cracked my knuckles, and took a
deep breath. Then, readying my weapons, I ran forward, leaping from platform
to platform, to confront the first of my adversaries.

Halliday had faithfully re-created every detail of Black Tiger’s eight-level
dungeon.
I got off to a rough start and lost a life before I even cleared the first boss. But
then I began to acclimate to playing the game in three dimensions (and from a
first-person perspective). Eventually, I found my groove.
I pressed onward, leaping from platform to platform, attacking in midair,
dodging the relentless onslaught of blobs, skeletons, snakes, mummies,
minotaurs, and yes, ninjas. Each enemy I vanquished dropped a pile of “Zenny
coins” that I could later use to purchase armor, weapons, and potions from one of
the bearded wise men scattered throughout each level. (These “wise men”
apparently thought setting up a small shop in the middle of a monster-infested
dungeon was a fine idea.)
There were no time-outs, and no way for me to pause the game. Once you
entered a gate, you couldn’t just stop and log out. The system wouldn’t allow it.
Even if you removed your visor, you would remain logged in. The only way out
of a gate was to go through it. Or die.
I managed to clear all eight levels of the game in just under three hours. The
closest I came to death was during my battle with the final boss, the Black
Dragon, who, of course, looked exactly like the beast depicted in the painting in
Anorak’s study. I’d used up all of my extra lives, and my vitality bar was almost
at zero, but I managed to keep moving and stay clear of the dragon’s fiery breath
while I slowly knocked down his life meter with a steady barrage of throwing
daggers. When I struck the final killing blow, the dragon crumbled into digital

dust in front of me.
I let out a long, exhausted sigh of relief.
Then, with no transition whatsoever, I found myself back in the bowling alley
game room, standing in front of the Black Tiger game. In front of me, on the
game’s monitor, my armored barbarian was striking a heroic pose. The following
text appeared below him:
YOU HAVE RETURNED PEACE AND PROSPERITY TO OUR
NATION.
THANK YOU, BLACK TIGER!
CONGRATULATIONS ON YOUR STRENGTH AND WISDOM!
Then something strange happened—something that had never happened when
I’d beaten the original game. One of the “wise men” from the dungeon appeared
on the screen, with a speech balloon that said, “Thank you. I am indebted to you.
Please accept a giant robot as your reward.”
A long row of robot icons appeared below the wise man, stretching across the
screen horizontally. By moving the joystick left or right, I found that I was able
to scroll through a selection of over a hundred different “giant robots.” When
one of these robots was highlighted, a detailed list of its stats and weaponry
appeared on the screen beside it.
There were several robots I didn’t recognize, but most were familiar. I spotted
Gigantor, Tranzor Z, the Iron Giant, Jet Jaguar, the sphinx-headed Giant Robo
from Johnny Sokko and His Flying Robot, the entire Shogun Warriors toy line,
and many of the mechs featured in both the Macross and Gundam anime series.
Eleven of these icons were grayed out and had a red “X” over them, and these
robots could not be identified or selected. I knew they must be the ones taken by
Sorrento and the other Sixers who had cleared this gate before me.
It seemed possible that I was about to be awarded a real, working recreation of
whichever robot I selected, so I studied my options carefully, searching for the
one I thought would be the most powerful and well armed. But I stopped cold
when I saw Leopardon, the giant transforming robot used by Supaidaman, the
incarnation of Spider-Man who appeared on Japanese TV in the late 1970s. I’d
discovered Supaidaman during the course of my research and had become
somewhat obsessed with the show. So I didn’t care if Leopardon was the most
powerful robot available. I had to have him, regardless.
I highlighted that icon and tapped the Fire button. A twelve-inch-tall replica of
Leopardon appeared on top of the Black Tiger cabinet. I grabbed it and placed it
in my inventory. There were no instructions, and the item description field was

blank. I made a mental note to examine it later, when I got back to my
stronghold.
Meanwhile, on the Black Tiger monitor, the end credits had begun to scroll
over an image of the game’s barbarian hero sitting on a throne with a slender
princess at his side. I respectfully read each of the programmers’ names. They
were all Japanese, except for the very last credit, which read OASIS PORT BY J. D.
HALLIDAY.
When the credits ended, the monitor went dark for a moment. Then a symbol
slowly appeared in the center of the screen: a glowing red circle with a fivepointed star inside it. The points of the star extended just beyond the outer edge
of the circle. A second later, an image of the Crystal Key appeared, spinning
slowly in the center of the glowing red star.
I felt a rush of adrenaline, because I recognized the red star symbol, and I
knew where it was meant to lead me.
I snapped several screenshots, just to be safe. A moment later, the monitor
went dark, and the Black Tiger game cabinet melted and morphed into a doorshaped portal with glowing jade edges. The exit.
I let out a triumphant cheer and jumped through it.

When I emerged from the gate, my avatar reappeared back inside Tyrell’s
office. The Voight-Kampff machine had reappeared in its original location,
resting on the table beside me. I checked the time. Over three hours had passed
since I’d first entered the gate. The room was deserted, save for the owl, and the
security klaxons were no longer wailing. The NPC guards must have busted in
and searched this area while I was still inside the gate, because they no longer
appeared to be looking for me. The coast was clear.
I made my way back to the elevator and up to the landing platform without
incident. And thanks be to Crom, the Vonnegut was still parked right where I’d
left it, its cloaking device still engaged. I ran on board and left Axrenox, jumping
to light speed as soon as I reached orbit.
As the Vonnegut streaked through hyperspace, headed for the nearest stargate,
I pulled up one of the screenshots I’d taken of the red star symbol. Then I
opened my grail diary and accessed the subfolder devoted to the legendary
Canadian rock band Rush.
Rush had been Halliday’s favorite band, from his teens onward. He’d once
revealed in an interview that he’d coded every single one of his videogames
(including the OASIS) while listening exclusively to Rush albums. He often
referred to Rush’s three members—Neil Peart, Alex Lifeson, and Geddy Lee—
as “the Holy Trinity” or “the Gods of the North.”
In my grail diary, I had every single Rush song, album, bootleg, and music
video ever made. I had high-res scans of all their liner notes and album artwork.
Every frame of Rush concert footage in existence. Every radio and television
interview the band had ever done. Unabridged biographies on each band
member, along with copies of their side projects and solo work. I pulled up the
band’s discography and selected the album I was looking for: 2112, Rush’s
classic sci-fi–themed concept album.
A high-resolution scan of the album’s cover appeared on my display. The
band’s name and the album’s title were printed over a field of stars, and below

that, appearing as if reflected in the surface of a rippling lake, was the symbol
I’d seen on the Black Tiger game’s monitor: a red five-pointed star enclosed in a
circle.
When I placed the album cover side by side with the screenshot of the game
screen, the two symbols matched exactly.
2112’s title track is an epic seven-part song, over twenty minutes in length.
The song tells the story of an anonymous rebel living in the year 2112, a time
when creativity and self-expression have been outlawed. The red star on the
album’s cover was the symbol of the Solar Federation, the oppressive interstellar
society in the story. The Solar Federation was controlled by a group of “priests,”
who are described in Part II of the song, titled “The Temples of Syrinx.” Its
lyrics told me exactly where the Crystal Key was hidden:
We are the Priests of the Temples of Syrinx
Our great computers fill the hallowed halls.
We are the Priests of the Temples of Syrinx
All the gifts of life are held within our walls.
There was a planet in Sector Twenty-one named Syrinx. That was where I was
headed now.
The OASIS atlas described Syrinx as “a desolate world with rocky terrain and
no NPC inhabitants.” When I accessed the planet’s colophon, I saw that Syrinx’s
author was listed as “Anonymous.” But I knew the planet must have been coded
by Halliday, because its design matched the world described in 2112’s liner
notes.
2112 was originally released in 1976, back when most music was sold on
twelve-inch vinyl records. The records came in cardboard sleeves with artwork
and a track listing printed on them. Some album sleeves opened up like a book
and included more artwork and liner notes inside, along with lyrics and
information about the band. As I pulled up a scan of 2112’s original fold-out
album sleeve, I saw that there was a second image of the red star symbol on the
inside. This one depicted a naked man cowering in front of the star, both his
hands raised in fear.
On the opposite side of the record sleeve were the printed lyrics to all seven
parts of the 2112 suite. The lyrics for each section were preceded by a paragraph
of prose that augmented the narrative laid out in the lyrics. These brief vignettes
were told from the point of view of 2112’s anonymous protagonist.
The following text preceded the lyrics to Part I:

I lie awake, staring out at the bleakness of Megadon. City and sky become
one, merging into a single plane, a vast sea of unbroken grey. The Twin
Moons, just two pale orbs as they trace their way across the steely sky.
When my ship reached Syrinx, I saw the twin moons, By-Tor and Snow Dog,
that orbited the planet. Their names were taken from another classic Rush song.
And down below, on the planet’s bleak gray surface, there were exactly 1,024
copies of Megadon, the domed city described in the liner notes. That was twice
the number of Zork instances there’d been on Frobozz, so I knew the Sixers
couldn’t barricade them all.
With my cloaking device engaged, I selected the nearest instance of the city
and landed the Vonnegut just outside the wall of its dome, watching my scopes
for other ships.
Megadon was anchored atop a rocky plateau, on the edge of an immense cliff.
The city appeared to be in ruins. Its massive transparent dome was riddled with
cracks and looked as though it might collapse at any moment. I was able to enter
the city by squeezing through one of the largest of these cracks, at the base of the
dome.
The city of Megadon reminded me of an old 1950s sci-fi paperback cover
painting depicting the crumbling ruins of a once-great technologically advanced
civilization. In the absolute center of the city I found a towering obelisk-shaped
temple with wind-blasted gray walls. A giant red star of the Solar Federation was
emblazoned above the entrance.
I was standing before the Temple of Syrinx.
It wasn’t covered by a force field, or surrounded by a detachment of Sixers.
There wasn’t a soul in sight.
I drew my guns and walked through the entrance of the temple.
Inside, mammoth obelisk-shaped supercomputers stood in long rows, filling
the giant, cathedral-like temple. I wandered along these rows, listening to the
deep hum of the machines, until I finally reached the center of the temple.
There, I found a raised stone altar with the five-pointed red star etched into its
surface. As I stepped up to the altar, the humming of the computers ceased, and
the chamber grew silent.
It appeared I was supposed to place something on the altar, an offering to the
Temple of Syrinx. But what kind of offering?
The twelve-inch Leopardon robot I’d acquired after completing the Second
Gate didn’t seem to fit. I tried placing it on the altar anyway and nothing
happened. I placed the robot back in my inventory and stood there for a moment,
thinking. Then I remembered something else from the 2112 liner notes. I pulled

them up and scanned over them again. There was my answer, in the text that
preceded Part III—“Discovery”:
Behind my beloved waterfall, in the little room that was hidden beneath the
cave, I found it. I brushed away the dust of the years, and picked it up,
holding it reverently in my hands. I had no idea what it might be, but it was
beautiful. I learned to lay my fingers across the wires, and to turn the keys
to make them sound differently. As I struck the wires with my other hand, I
produced my first harmonious sounds, and soon my own music!
I found the waterfall near the southern edge of the city, just inside the curved
wall of the atmospheric dome. As soon as I found it, I activated my jet boots and
flew over the foaming river below the falls, then passed through the waterfall
itself. My haptic suit did its best to simulate the sensation of torrents of falling
water striking my body, but it felt more like someone pounding on my head,
shoulders, and back with a bundle of sticks. Once I’d passed through the falls to
the other side, I found the opening of a cave and went inside. The cave narrowed
into a long tunnel, which terminated in a small, cavernous room.
I searched the room and discovered that one of the stalagmites protruding
from the floor was slightly worn around the tip. I grabbed the stalagmite and
pulled it toward me, but it didn’t budge. I tried pushing, and it gave, bending as
if on some hidden hinge, like a lever. I heard a rumble of grinding stone behind
me, and I turned to see a trapdoor opening in the floor. A hole had also opened in
the roof of the cave, casting a brilliant shaft of light down through the open
trapdoor, into a tiny hidden chamber below.
I took an item out of my inventory, a wand that could detect hidden traps,
magical or otherwise. I used it to make sure the area was clear, then jumped
down through the trapdoor and landed on the dusty floor of the hidden chamber.
It was a tiny cube-shaped room with a large rough-hewn stone standing against
the north wall. Embedded in the stone, neck first, was an electric guitar. I
recognized its design from the 2112 concert footage I’d watched during the trip
here. It was a 1974 Gibson Les Paul, the exact guitar used by Alex Lifeson
during the 2112 tour.
I grinned at the absurd Arthurian image of the guitar in the stone. Like every
gunter, I’d seen John Boorman’s film Excalibur many times, so it seemed
obvious what I should do next. I reached out with my right hand, grasped the
neck of the guitar, and pulled. The guitar came free of the stone with a prolonged
metallic shhingggg!
As I held the guitar over my head, the metallic ringing segued into a guitar

power chord that echoed throughout the cave. I stared down at the guitar, about
to activate my jet boots again, to fly back up through the trapdoor and out of the
cave. But then an idea occurred to me and I froze.
James Halliday had taken guitar lessons for a few years in high school. That
was what had first inspired me to learn to play. I’d never held an actual guitar,
but on a virtual axe, I could totally shred.
I searched my inventory and found a guitar pick. Then I opened my grail diary
and pulled up the sheet music for 2112, along with the guitar tablature for the
song “Discovery,” which describes the hero’s discovery of the guitar in a room
hidden behind a waterfall. As I began to play the song, the sound of the guitar
blasted off the chamber walls and back out through the cave, despite the absence
of any electricity or amplifiers.
When I finished playing the first measure of “Discovery,” a message briefly
appeared, carved into the stone from which I’d pulled the guitar.
The first was ringed in red metal
The second, in green stone
The third is clearest crystal
and cannot be unlocked alone
In seconds, the words began to vanish, fading from the stone along with the
strains of the last note I’d played on the guitar. I quickly snapped a screenshot of
the riddle, already trying to sort out its meaning. It was about the Third Gate, of
course. And how it could not “be unlocked alone.”
Had the Sixers played the song and discovered this message? I seriously
doubted it. They would have pulled the guitar from the stone and immediately
returned it to the temple.
If so, they probably didn’t know there was some sort of trick to unlocking the
Third Gate. And that would explain why they still hadn’t reached the egg.

I returned to the temple and placed the guitar on the altar. As I did, the towering
computers around me began to emit a cacophony of sound, like a grand orchestra
tuning up. The noise built to a deafening crescendo before ceasing abruptly.
Then there was a flash of light on the altar, and the guitar transformed into the
Crystal Key.
When I reached out and picked up the key, a chime sounded, and my score on
the Scoreboard increased by 25,000 points. When added to the 200,000 I’d
received for clearing the Second Gate, that brought my total score up to 353,000

points, one thousand points more than Sorrento. I was back in first place.
But I knew this was no time to celebrate. I quickly examined the Crystal Key,
tilting it up to study its glittering, faceted surface. I didn’t see any words etched
there, but I did find a small monogram etched in the center of the key’s crystal
handle, a single calligraphic letter “A” that I recognized immediately.
That same letter “A” appeared in the Character Symbol box on James
Halliday’s first Dungeons & Dragons character sheet. The very same monogram
also appeared on the dark robes of his famous OASIS avatar, Anorak. And, I
knew, that same emblematic letter adorned the front gates of Castle Anorak, his
avatar’s impregnable stronghold.
In the first few years of the Hunt, gunters had swarmed like hungry insects to
any OASIS location that seemed like a possible hiding place for the three keys,
specifically planets originally coded by Halliday himself. Chief among these was
the planet Chthonia, a painstaking re-creation of the fantasy world Halliday had
created for his high-school Dungeons & Dragons campaign, and also the setting
of many of his early videogames. Chthonia had become the gunters’ Mecca. Like
everyone else, I’d felt obligated to make a pilgrimage there, to visit Castle
Anorak. But the castle was impregnable and always had been. No avatar but
Anorak himself had ever been able to pass through its entrance.
But now I knew there must be a way to enter Castle Anorak. Because the
Third Gate was hidden somewhere inside.

When I got back to my ship, I blasted off and set a course for Chthonia in Sector
Ten. Then I began to scan the newsfeeds, intending to check out the media
frenzy my return to first place was generating. But my score wasn’t the top story.
No, the big news that afternoon was that the hiding place of Halliday’s Easter
egg had, at long last, finally been revealed to the world. It was, the news anchors
said, located somewhere on the planet Chthonia, inside Castle Anorak. They
knew this because the entire Sixer army was now encamped around the castle.
They’d arrived earlier that day, shortly after I’d cleared the Second Gate.
I knew the timing couldn’t be a coincidence. My progress must have prompted
the Sixers to end their covert attempts to clear the Third Gate and make its
location public by barricading it before I or anyone else could reach it.
When I arrived at Chthonia a few minutes later, I did a cloaked flyby of the
castle, just to gauge the lay of the land for myself. It was even worse than I’d
imagined.
The Sixers had installed some type of magical shield over Castle Anorak, a
semitransparent dome that completely covered the castle and the area around it.

Encamped inside the shield wall was the entire Sixer army. A vast collection of
troops, tanks, weapons, and vehicles surrounded the castle on all sides.
Several gunter clans were already on the scene, and they were making their
first attempts to bring down the shield by launching high-yield nukes at it. Each
detonation was followed by a brief atomic light show, and then the blast would
dissipate harmlessly against the shield.
The attacks on the shield continued for the next few hours as the news spread
and more and more gunters arrived on Chthonia. The clans launched every type
of weapon they could think of at the shield, but nothing affected it. Not nukes,
not fireballs, and not magic missiles. Eventually, a team of gunters tried to dig a
tunnel under the dome wall, and that was when it was discovered that the shield
was actually a complete sphere surrounding the castle, above- and belowground.
Later that night, several high-level gunter wizards finished casting a series of
divination spells on the castle and announced on the message boards that the
shield around the castle was generated by a powerful artifact called the Orb of
Osuvox, which could only be operated by a wizard who was ninety-ninth level.
According to the artifact’s item description, it could create a spherical shield
around itself, with a circumference of up to half a kilometer. This shield was
impenetrable and indestructible and could vaporize just about anything that
touched it. It could also be kept up indefinitely, as long as the wizard operating
the orb remained immobile and kept both hands on the artifact.
In the days that followed, gunters tried everything they could think of to
penetrate the shield. Magic. Technology. Teleportation. Counterspells. Other
artifacts. Nothing worked. There was no way to get inside.
An air of hopelessness quickly swept through the gunter community. Solos
and clansmen alike were ready to throw in the towel. The Sixers had the Crystal
Key and exclusive access to the Third Gate. Everyone agreed that The End was
near, that the Hunt was “all over but the crying.”
During all of these developments, I somehow managed to keep my cool.
There was a chance the Sixers hadn’t even figured out how to open the Third
Gate yet. Of course, they had plenty of time now. They could be slow and
methodical. Sooner or later, they would stumble on the solution.
But I refused to give up. Until an avatar reached Halliday’s Easter egg,
anything was still possible.
Like any classic videogame, the Hunt had simply reached a new, more
difficult level. A new level often required an entirely new strategy.
I began to formulate a plan. A bold, outrageous plan that would require epic
amounts of luck to pull off. I set this plan in motion by e-mailing Art3mis, Aech,
and Shoto. My message told them exactly where to find the Second Gate and

how to obtain the Crystal Key. Once I was sure all three of them had received
my message, I initiated the next phase of my plan. This was the part that terrified
me, because I knew there was a good chance it was going to end up getting me
killed. But at this point, I no longer cared.
I was going to reach the Third Gate, or die trying.

Going outside is highly overrated.
—Anorak’s Almanac, Chapter 17, Verse 32

When the IOI corporate police came to arrest me, I was right in the middle
of the movie Explorers (1985, directed by Joe Dante). It’s about three kids who
build a spaceship in their backyard and then fly off to meet aliens. Easily one of
the greatest kid flicks ever made. I’d gotten into the habit of watching it at least
once a month. It kept me centered.
I had a thumbnail of my apartment building’s external security camera feed at
the edge of my display, so I saw the IOI Indentured Servant Retrieval Transport
pull up out front, siren wailing and lights flashing. Then four jackbooted, riothelmeted dropcops jumped out and ran into the building, followed by a guy in a
suit. I continued to watch them on the lobby camera as they waved their IOI
badges, blew past the security station, and filed onto the elevator.
Now they were on their way up to my floor.
“Max,” I muttered, noting the fear in my own voice. “Execute security macro
number one: Crom, strong in his mountain.” This voice command instructed my
computer to execute a long series of preprogrammed actions, both online and in
the real world.
“You g-g-got it, Chief!” Max replied cheerfully, and a split second later, my
apartment’s security system switched into lockdown mode. My reinforced platetitanium WarDoor swung down from the ceiling, slamming and locking into
place over my apartment’s built-in security door.
On the security camera mounted in the hallway outside my apartment, I
watched the four dropcops get off the elevator and sprint down the hallway to
my door. The two guys in front were carrying plasma welders. The other two
held industrial-strength VoltJolt stun guns. The suit, who brought up the rear,
was carrying a digital clipboard.
I wasn’t surprised to see them. I knew why they were here. They were here to
cut open my apartment and pull me out of it, like a chunk of Spam being
removed from a can.
When they reached my door, my scanner gave them the once-over, and their

ID data flashed on my display, informing me that all five of these men were IOI
credit officers with a valid indenturement arrest warrant for one Bryce Lynch,
the occupant of this apartment. So, in keeping with local, state, and federal law,
my apartment building’s security system immediately opened both of my
security doors to grant them entrance. But the WarDoor that had just slammed
into place kept them outside.
Of course, the dropcops expected me to have redundant security, which is why
they’d brought plasma welders.
The IOI drone in the suit squeezed past the dropcops and gingerly pressed his
thumb to my door intercom. His name and corporate title appeared on my
display: Michael Wilson, IOI Credit and Collections Division, Employee # IOI481231.
Wilson looked up into the lens of my hallway camera and smiled pleasantly.
“Mr. Lynch,” he said. “My name is Michael Wilson, and I’m with the Credit and
Collections division of Innovative Online Industries.” He consulted his
clipboard. “I’m here because you have failed to make the last three payments on
your IOI Visa card, which has an outstanding balance in excess of twenty
thousand dollars. Our records also show that you are currently unemployed and
have therefore been classified as impecunious. Under current federal law, you
are now eligible for mandatory indenturement. You will remain indentured until
you have paid your debt to our company in full, along with all applicable
interest, processing and late fees, and any other charges or penalties that you
incur henceforth.” Wilson motioned toward the dropcops. “These gentlemen are
here to assist me in apprehending you and escorting you to your new place of
employment. We request that you open your door and grant us access to your
residence. Please be aware that we are authorized to seize any personal
belongings you have inside. The sale value of these items will, of course, be
deducted from your outstanding credit balance.”
As far as I could tell, Wilson recited all of this without taking a single breath,
speaking in the flat monotone of someone who repeats the same sentences all
day long.
After a brief pause, I replied through the intercom. “Sure thing, guys. Just give
me a minute to get my pants on. Then I’ll be right out.”
Wilson frowned. “Mr. Lynch, if you do not grant us access to your residence
within ten seconds, we are authorized to enter by force. The cost of any damage
resulting from our forced entry, including all property damage and repair labor,
will be added to your outstanding balance. Thank you.”
Wilson stepped away from the intercom and nodded to the others. One of the
dropcops immediately powered up his welder, and when the tip began to glow

molten orange, he began cutting through my War-Door’s titanium plating. The
other welder moved a few feet farther down and began to cut a hole right
through the wall of my apartment. These guys had access to the building’s
security specs, so they knew the walls of each apartment were lined with steel
plating and a layer of concrete, which they could cut through much more quickly
than the titanium WarDoor.
Of course, I’d taken the precaution of reinforcing my apartment’s walls, floor,
and ceiling, with a titanium alloy SageCage, which I’d assembled piece by piece.
Once they cut through my wall, they would have to cut through the cage, too.
But this would buy me only five or six extra minutes, at the most. Then they
would be inside.
I’d heard that dropcops had a nickname for this procedure—cutting an indent
out of a fortified residence so they could arrest him. They called it doing a Csection.
I dry-swallowed two of the antianxiety pills I’d ordered in preparation for this
day. I’d already taken two earlier that morning, but they didn’t seem to be
working.
Inside the OASIS, I closed all the windows on my display and set my
account’s security level to maximum. Then I pulled up the Scoreboard, just to
check it one last time and reassure myself that nothing had changed and that the
Sixers still hadn’t won. The top ten rankings had been static for several days
now.
HIGH SCORES:
1. Art3mis
2. Parzival
3. IOI-655321
4. Aech
5. IOI-643187
6. IOI-621671
7. IOI-678324
8. Shoto
9. IOI-637330
10. IOI-699423

354,000
353,000
352,000
352,000
349,000
348,000
347,000
347,000
346,000
346,000

Art3mis, Aech, and Shoto had all cleared the Second Gate and obtained the

Crystal Key within forty-eight hours of receiving my e-mail. When Art3mis
received the 25,000 points for reaching the Crystal Key, it had put her back in
first place, due to the point bonuses she’d already received for finding the Jade
Key first, and the Copper Key second.
Art3mis, Aech, and Shoto had all tried to contact me since receiving my email, but I hadn’t answered any of their phone calls, e-mails, or chat requests. I
saw no reason to tell them what I intended to do. They couldn’t do anything to
help me and would probably just try to talk me out of it.
There was no turning back now, anyway.
I closed the Scoreboard and took a long look around my stronghold,
wondering if it was for the last time. Then I took several quick deep breaths, like
a deep-sea diver preparing to submerge, and tapped the logout icon on my
display. The OASIS vanished, and my avatar reappeared inside my virtual office,
a standalone simulation stored on my console’s hard drive. I opened a console
window and keyed in the command word to activate my computer’s self-destruct
sequence: SHITSTORM.
A progress meter appeared on my display, showing that my hard drive was
now being zeroed out and wiped clean.
“Good-bye, Max,” I whispered.
“Adios, Wade,” Max said, just a few seconds before he was deleted.
Sitting in my haptic chair, I could already feel the heat coming from the other
side of the room. When I pulled off my visor, I saw smoke pouring in through
the holes being cut in the door and the wall. It was starting to get too thick for
my apartment’s air purifiers to handle. I began to cough.
The dropcop working on my door finished cutting his hole. The smoking
circle of metal fell to the floor with a heavy metallic boom that made me jump in
my chair.
As the welder stepped back, another dropcop stepped forward and used a
small canister to spray some sort of freezing foam around the edge of the hole,
cooling off the metal so they wouldn’t burn themselves when they crawled
inside. Which was what they were about to do.
“Clear!” one of them shouted from out in the hallway. “No visible weapons!”
One of the stun-gun wielding dropcops climbed through the hole first.
Suddenly, he was standing right in front of me, his weapon leveled at my face.
“Don’t move!” he shouted. “Or you get the juice, understand?”
I nodded that yes, I understood. It occurred to me then that this cop was the
first visitor I’d ever had in my apartment in all the time I’d lived there.
The second dropcop to crawl inside wasn’t nearly as polite. Without a word,
he walked over and jammed a ball gag in my mouth. This was standard

procedure, because they didn’t want me to issue any more voice commands to
my computer. They needn’t have bothered. The moment the first dropcop had
entered my apartment, an incendiary device had detonated inside my computer.
It was already melting to slag.
When the dropcop finished strapping on the ball gag, he grabbed me by the
exoskeleton of my haptic suit, yanked me out of my haptic chair like a rag doll,
and threw me on the floor. The other dropcop hit the kill switch that opened my
WarDoor, and the last two dropcops rushed in, followed by Wilson the suit.
I curled into a ball on the floor and closed my eyes. I started to shake
involuntarily. I tried to prepare myself for what I knew was about to happen
next.
They were going to take me outside.
“Mr. Lynch,” Wilson said, smiling. “I hereby place you under corporate
arrest.” He turned to the dropcops. “Tell the repo team to come on up and clear
this place out.” He glanced around the room and noticed the thin line of smoke
now pouring out of my computer. He looked at me and shook his head. “That
was stupid. We could have sold that computer to help pay down your debt.”
I couldn’t reply around the ball gag, so I just shrugged and gave him the
finger.
They tore off my haptic suit and left it for the repo team. I was totally naked
underneath. They gave me a disposable slate-gray jumpsuit to put on, with
matching plastic shoes. The suit felt like sandpaper, and it began to make me itch
as soon as I put it on. They’d cuffed my hands, so it wasn’t easy to scratch.
They dragged me out into the hall. The harsh fluorescents sucked the color out
of everything and made it look like an old black-and-white film. As we rode the
elevator down to the lobby, I hummed along with the Muzak as loudly as I
could, to show them I wasn’t afraid. When one of the dropcops waved his stun
gun at me, I stopped.
They put a hooded winter coat on me in the lobby. They didn’t want me
catching pneumonia now that I was company property. A human resource. Then
they led me outside, and sunlight hit my face for the first time in over half a year.
It was snowing, and everything was covered in a thin layer of gray ice and
slush. I didn’t know what the temperature was, but I couldn’t remember ever
feeling so cold. The wind cut right to my bones.
They herded me over to their transport truck. Two new indents already sat in
the back, strapped into plastic seats, both wearing visors. People they’d arrested
earlier that morning. The dropcops were like garbage collectors, making their
daily rounds.
The indent on my right was a tall, thin guy, probably a few years older than

me. He looked like he might be suffering from malnutrition. The other indent
was morbidly obese, and I couldn’t be sure of the person’s gender. I decided to
think of him as male. His face was obscured by a mop of dirty blond hair, and
something that looked like a gas mask covered his nose and mouth. A thick
black tube ran from the mask down to a nozzle on the floor. I wasn’t sure of its
purpose until he lurched forward, drawing his restraints tight, and vomited into
the mask. I heard a vacuum activate, sucking the indent’s regurgitated Oreos
down the tube and into the floor. I wondered if they stored it in an external tank
or just dumped it on the street. Probably a tank. IOI would probably have his
vomit analyzed and put the results in his file.
“You feel sick?” one of the dropcops asked as he removed my ball gag. “Tell
me now and I’ll put a mask on you.”
“I feel great,” I said, not very convincingly.
“OK. But if I have to clean up your puke, I’ll make sure you regret it.”
They shoved me inside and strapped me down directly across from the skinny
guy. Two of the dropcops climbed into the back with us, stowing their plasma
welders in a locker. The other two slammed the rear doors and climbed into the
cab up front.
As we pulled away from my apartment complex, I craned my neck to look
through the transport’s tinted rear windows, up at the building where I’d lived
for the past year. I was able to spot my window up on the forty-second floor,
because of its spray-painted black glass. The repo team was probably already up
there by now. All of my gear was being disassembled, inventoried, tagged,
boxed, and prepared for auction. Once they finished emptying out my apartment,
custodial bots would scour and disinfect it. A repair crew would patch the outer
wall and replace the door. IOI would be billed, and the cost of the repairs would
be added to my outstanding debt to the company.
By midafternoon, the lucky gunter who was next on the apartment building’s
waiting list would get a message informing him that a unit had opened up, and
by this evening, the new tenant would probably already be moved in. By the
time the sun went down, all evidence that I’d ever lived there would be totally
erased.
As the transport swung out onto High Street, I heard the tires crunch the salt
crystals covering the frozen asphalt. One of the dropcops reached over and
slapped a visor on my face. I found myself sitting on a sandy white beach,
watching the sunset while waves crashed in front of me. This must be the
simulation they used to keep indents calm during the ride downtown.
Using my cuffed hand, I pushed the visor up onto my forehead. The dropcops
didn’t seem to care or pay me any notice at all. So I craned my head again to

stare out the window. I hadn’t been out here in the real world for a long time, and
I wanted to see how it had changed.

A thick film of neglect still covered everything in sight. The streets, the
buildings, the people. Even the snow seemed dirty. It drifted down in gray flakes,
like ash after a volcanic eruption.
The number of homeless people seemed to have increased drastically. Tents
and cardboard shelters lined the streets, and the public parks I saw seemed to
have been converted into refugee camps. As the transport rolled deeper into the
city’s skyscraper core, I saw people clustered on every street corner and in every
vacant lot, huddled around burning barrels and portable fuel-cell heaters. Others
waited in line at the free solar charging stations, wearing bulky, outdated visors
and haptic gloves. Their hands made small, ghostly gestures as they interacted
with the far more pleasant reality of the OASIS via one of GSS’s free wireless
access points.
Finally, we reached 101 IOI Plaza, in the heart of downtown.
I stared out the window in silent apprehension as the corporate headquarters of
Innovative Online Industries Inc. came into view: two rectangular skyscrapers
flanking a circular one, forming the IOI corporate logo. The IOI skyscrapers
were the three tallest buildings in the city, mighty towers of steel and mirrored
glass joined by dozens of connective walkways and elevator trams. The top of
each tower disappeared into the sodium-vapor-drenched cloud layer above. The
buildings looked identical to their headquarters in the OASIS on IOI-1, but here
in the real world they seemed much more impressive.
The transport rolled into a parking garage at the base of the circular tower and
descended a series of concrete ramps until we arrived in a large open area
resembling a loading dock. A sign over a row of wide bay doors read IOI
INDENTURED EMPLOYEE INDUCTION CENTER.
The other indents and I were herded off the transport, where a squad of stun
gun–armed security guards was waiting to take custody of us. Our handcuffs
were removed; then another guard began to swipe each of us with a handheld
retina scanner. I held my breath as he held the scanner up to my eyes. A second

later, the unit beeped and he read off the information on its display. “Lynch,
Bryce. Age twenty-two. Full citizenship. No criminal record. Credit Default
Indenturement.” He nodded to himself and tapped a series of icons on his
clipboard. Then I was led into a warm, brightly lit room filled with hundreds of
other new indents. They were all shuffling through a maze of guide ropes, like
weary overgrown children at some nightmarish amusement park. There seemed
to be an equal number of men and women, but it was hard to tell, because nearly
everyone shared my pale complexion and total lack of body hair, and we all
wore the same gray jumpsuits and gray plastic shoes. We looked like extras from
THX 1138.
The line fed into a series of security checkpoints. At the first checkpoint, each
indent was given a thorough scan with a brand-new Meta-detector to make sure
they weren’t hiding any electronic devices on or in their persons. While I waited
for my turn, I saw several people pulled out of line when the scanner found a
subcutaneous minicomputer or a voice-controlled phone installed as a tooth
replacement. They were led into another room to have the devices removed. A
dude just ahead of me in line actually had a top-of-the-line miniature Sinatro
OASIS console concealed inside a prosthetic testicle. Talk about balls.
Once I’d cleared a few more checkpoints, I was ushered into the testing area, a
giant room filled with hundreds of small, soundproofed cubicles. I was seated in
one of them and given a cheap visor and an even cheaper pair of haptic gloves.
The gear didn’t give me access to the OASIS, but I still found it comforting to
put it on.
I was then given a battery of increasingly difficult aptitude tests intended to
measure my knowledge and abilities in every area that might conceivably be of
use to my new employer. These tests were, of course, cross-referenced with the
fake educational background and work history that I’d given to my bogus Bryce
Lynch identity.
I made sure to ace all of the tests on OASIS software, hardware, and
networking, but I intentionally failed the tests designed to gauge my knowledge
of James Halliday and the Easter egg. I definitely didn’t want to get placed in
IOI’s Oology Division. There was a chance I might run into Sorrento there. I
didn’t think he’d recognize me—we’d never actually met in person, and I now
barely resembled my old school ID photo—but I didn’t want to risk it. I was
already tempting fate more than anyone in their right mind ever would.
Hours later, when I finally finished the last exam, I was logged into a virtual
chat room to meet with an indenturement counselor. Her name was Nancy, and
in a hypnotic monotone, she informed me that, due to my exemplary test scores
and impressive employment record, I had been “awarded” the position of OASIS

Technical Support Representative II. I would be paid $28,500 a year, minus the
cost of my housing, meals, taxes, medical, dental, optical, and recreation
services, all of which would be deducted automatically from my pay. My
remaining income (if there was any) would be applied to my outstanding debt to
the company. Once my debt was paid in full, I would be released from
indenturement. At that time, based on my job performance, it was possible I
would be offered a permanent position with IOI.
This was a complete joke, of course. Indents were never able to pay off their
debt and earn their release. Once they got finished slapping you with pay
deductions, late fees, and interest penalties, you wound up owing them more
each month, instead of less. Once you made the mistake of getting yourself
indentured, you would probably remain indentured for life. A lot of people didn’t
seem to mind this, though. They thought of it as job security. It also meant they
weren’t going to starve or freeze to death in the street.
My “Indenturement Contract” appeared in a window on my display. It
contained a long list of disclaimers and warnings about my rights (or lack
thereof) as an indentured employee. Nancy told me to read it, sign it, and
proceed to Indent Processing. Then she logged out of the chat room. I scrolled to
the bottom of the contract without bothering to read it. It was over six hundred
pages long. I signed the name Bryce Lynch, then verified my signature with a
retinal scan.
Even though I was using a fake name, I wondered if the contract might still be
legally binding. I wasn’t sure, and I didn’t really care. I had a plan, and this was
part of it.
They led me down another corridor, into the Indenturement Processing Area. I
was placed on a conveyor belt that carried me through a long series of stations.
First, they took my jumpsuit and shoes and incinerated them. Then they ran me
through a kind of human car wash—a series of machines that soaped, scrubbed,
disinfected, rinsed, dried, and deloused me. Afterward, I was given a new gray
jumpsuit and another pair of plastic slippers.
At the next station, a bank of machines gave me a complete physical,
including a battery of blood tests. (Luckily, the Genetic Privacy Act made it
illegal for IOI to sample my DNA.) Then I was given a series of inoculations
with an array of automated needle guns that shot me in both shoulders and both
ass cheeks simultaneously.
As I inched forward along the conveyor, flat-screen monitors mounted
overhead showed the same ten-minute training film over and over, on an endless
loop: “Indentured Servitude: Your Fast Track from Debt to Success!” The cast
was made up of D-list television stars who cheerfully spouted corporate

propaganda while relating the minutiae of IOI’s indenturement policy. After five
viewings, I had every line of the damn thing memorized. By the tenth viewing, I
was mouthing the words along with the actors.
“What can I expect after I complete my initial processing and get placed in my
permanent position?” asked Johnny, the training film’s main character.
You can expect to spend the rest of your life as a corporate slave, Johnny, I
thought. But I kept watching as, once again, the helpful IOI Human Resources
rep pleasantly told Johnny all about the day-to-day life of an indent.
Finally, I reached the last station, where a machine fitted me with a security
anklet—a padded metal band that locked around my ankle, just above the joint.
According to the training film, this device monitored my physical location and
also granted or denied me access to different areas of the IOI office complex. If I
tried to escape, remove the anklet, or cause trouble of any kind, the device was
capable of delivering a paralyzing electrical shock. If necessary, it could also
administer a heavy-duty tranquilizer directly into my bloodstream.
After the anklet was on, another machine clamped a small electronic device
onto my right earlobe, piercing it in two locations. I winced in pain and shouted
a stream of profanity. I knew from the training film that I’d just been fitted with
an OCT. OCT stood for “observation and communication tag.” But most indents
just referred to it as “eargear.” It reminded me of the tags environmentalists used
to put on endangered animals, to track their movements in the wild. The eargear
contained a tiny comlink that allowed the main IOI Human Resources computer
to make announcements and issue commands directly into my ear. It also
contained a tiny forward-looking camera that let IOI supervisors see whatever
was directly in front of me. Surveillance cameras were mounted in every room in
the IOI complex, but that apparently wasn’t enough. They also had to mount a
camera to the side of every indent’s head.
A few seconds after my eargear was attached and activated, I began to hear the
placid monotone of the HR mainframe, droning instructions and other
information. The voice drove me nuts at first, but I gradually got used to it. I
didn’t have much choice.
As I stepped off the conveyor, the HR computer directed me to a nearby
cafeteria that looked like something out of an old prison movie. I was given a
lime green tray of food. A tasteless soyburger, a lump of runny mashed potatoes,
and some unrecognizable form of cobbler for dessert. I devoured all of it in a
few minutes. The HR computer complimented me on my healthy appetite. Then
it informed me that I was now permitted to make a five-minute visit to the
bathroom. When I came out, I was directed onto an elevator with no buttons or
floor indicator. When the doors slid open, I saw the following stenciled on the

wall: INDENT HAB—BLOCK 05—TECHSUP REPS.
I shuffled off the elevator and down the carpeted hallway. It was quiet and
dark. The only illumination came from small path lighting embedded in the
floor. I’d lost track of the time. It seemed like days had passed since I’d been
pulled out of my apartment. I was dead on my feet.
“Your first technical support shift begins in seven hours,” the HR computer
droned softly in my ear. “You have until then to sleep. Turn left at the
intersection in front of you and proceed to your assigned hab-unit, number 42G.”
I continued to do as I was told. I thought I was already getting pretty good at
it.
The Hab Block reminded me of a mausoleum. It was a network of vaulted
hallways, each lined with coffin-shaped sleeping capsules, row after row of
them, stacked to the ceiling, ten high. Each column of hab-units was numbered,
and the door of each capsule was lettered, A through J, with unit A at the bottom.
I eventually reached my unit, near the top of column number forty-two. As I
approached it, the hatch irised open with a hiss, and a soft blue light winked on
inside. I ascended the narrow access ladder mounted between the adjacent rows
of capsules, then stepped onto the short platform beneath the hatch to my unit.
When I climbed inside the capsule, the platform retracted and the hatch irised
shut at my feet.
The inside of my hab-unit was an eggshell white injection-molded plastic
coffin, a meter high, a meter wide, and two meters long. The floor of the capsule
was covered with a gel-foam mattress pad and pillow. They both smelled like
burned rubber, so I assumed they must be new.
In addition to the camera attached to the side of my head, there was a camera
mounted above the door of my hab-unit. The company didn’t bother hiding it.
They wanted their indents to know they were being watched.
The unit’s only amenity was the entertainment console—a large, flat
touchscreen built into the wall. A wireless visor was snapped into a holder beside
it. I tapped the touchscreen, activating the unit. My new employee number and
position appeared at the top of the display: Lynch, Bryce T.—OASIS TECH REP
II—IOI Employee #338645.
A menu appeared below, listing the entertainment programming to which I
presently had access. It took only a few seconds to peruse my limited options. I
could view only one channel: IOI-N—the company’s twenty-four-hour news
network. It provided a nonstop stream of company-related news and propaganda.
I also had access to a library of training films and simulations, most of which
were geared toward my new position as an OASIS technical support
representative.

When I tried to access one of the other entertainment libraries, Vintage
Movies, the system informed me that I wouldn’t be granted access to a wider
selection of entertainment options until I had received an above-average rating in
three consecutive employee performance reviews. Then the system asked me if I
wanted more information on the Indentured Employee Entertainment Reward
Program. I didn’t.
The only TV show I had access to was a company-produced sitcom called
Tommy Queue. The synopsis said it was a “wacky situation comedy chronicling
the misadventures of Tommy, a newly indentured OASIS tech rep struggling to
achieve his goals of financial independence and on-the-job excellence!”
I selected the first episode of Tommy Queue, then unsnapped the visor and put
it on. As I expected, the show was really just a training film with a laugh track. I
had absolutely no interest in it. I just wanted to go to sleep. But I knew I was
being watched, and that every move I made was being scrutinized and logged.
So I stayed awake as long as I could, ignoring one episode of Tommy Queue
after another.
Despite my best efforts, my thoughts drifted to Art3mis. Regardless of what
I’d been telling myself, I knew she was the real reason I’d gone through with this
lunatic plan. What the hell was wrong with me? There was a good chance I
might never escape from this place. I felt buried under an avalanche of selfdoubt. Had my dual obsessions with the egg and Art3mis finally driven me
completely insane? Why would I take such an idiotic risk to win over someone
I’d never actually met? Someone who appeared to have no interest in ever
talking to me again?
Where was she right now? Did she miss me?
I continued to mentally torture myself like that until I finally drifted off to
sleep.

lOI’s Technical Support call center occupied three entire floors of the
headquarters’ eastern I-shaped tower. Each of these floors contained a maze of
numbered cubicles. Mine was stuck back in a remote corner, far from any
windows. My cubicle was completely empty except for an adjustable office chair
bolted to the floor. Several of the cubicles around me were unoccupied, awaiting
the arrival of other new indents.
I wasn’t permitted to have any decorations in my cubicle, because I hadn’t
earned that privilege yet. If I obtained a sufficient number of “perk points” by
getting high productivity and customer approval ratings, I could “spend” some of
them to purchase the privilege of decorating my cube, perhaps with a potted
plant or an inspirational poster of a kitten hanging from a clothesline.
When I arrived in my cubicle, I grabbed my company-issued visor and gloves
from the rack on the bare cube wall and put them on. Then I collapsed into my
chair. My work computer was built into the chair’s circular base, and it activated
itself automatically when I sat down. My employee ID was verified and I was
automatically logged into my work account on the IOI intranet. I wasn’t allowed
to have any outbound access to the OASIS. All I could really do was read workrelated e-mails, view support documentation and procedural manuals, and check
my call time statistics. That was it. And every move I made on the intranet was
closely monitored, controlled, and logged.
I put myself in the call queue and began my twelve-hour shift. I’d been an
indent for only eight days now, but it already felt like I’d been imprisoned here
for years.
The first caller’s avatar appeared in front of me in my support chat room. His
name and stats also appeared, floating in the air above him. He had the
astoundingly clever name of “HotCock007.”
I could see that it was going to be another fabulous day.
HotCock007 was a hulking bald barbarian with studded black leather armor
and lots of demon tattoos covering his arms and face. He was holding a gigantic

bastard sword nearly twice as long as his avatar’s body.
“Good morning, Mr. HotCock007,” I droned. “Thank you for calling technical
support. I’m tech rep number 338645. How may I help you this evening?” The
customer courtesy software filtered my voice, altering its tone and inflection to
ensure that I always sounded cheerful and upbeat.
“Uh, yeah …” HotCock007 began. “I just bought this bad-ass sword, and now
I can’t even use it! I can’t even attack nothing with it. What the hell is wrong
with this piece of shit? Is it broke?”
“Sir, the only problem is that you’re a complete fucking moron,” I said.
I heard a familiar warning buzzer and a message flashed on my display:
COURTESY VIOLATION—FLAGS: FUCKING, MORON
LAST RESPONSE MUTED—VIOLATION LOGGED
IOI’s patented customer courtesy software had detected the inappropriate
nature of my response and muted it, so the customer didn’t hear what I’d said.
The software also logged my “courtesy violation” and forwarded it to Trevor, my
section supervisor, so that he could bring it up during my next biweekly
performance review.
“Sir, did you purchase this sword in an online auction?”
“Yeah,” HotCock007 replied. “Paid out the ass for it too.”
“Just a moment, sir, while I examine the item.” I already knew what his
problem was, but I needed to make sure before telling him or I’d get hit with a
fine.
I tapped the sword with my index finger, selecting it. A small window opened
and displayed the item’s properties. The answer was right there, on the first line.
This particular magic sword could only be used by an avatar who was tenth level
or higher. Mr. HotCock007 was only seventh level. I quickly explained this to
him.
“What?! That ain’t fair! The guy who sold it to me didn’t say nothing about
that!”
“Sir, it’s always advisable to make sure your avatar can actually use an item
before you purchase it.”
“Goddammit!” he shouted. “Well, what am I supposed to do with it now?”
“You could shove it up your ass and pretend you’re a corn dog.”
COURTESY VIOLATION—RESPONSE MUTED—VIOLATION
LOGGED.

I tried again. “Sir, you might want to keep the item stored in your inventory
until your avatar has attained tenth level. Or you may wish to put the item back
up for auction yourself and use the proceeds to purchase a similar weapon. One
with a power level commensurate to that of your avatar.”
“Huh?” HotCock007 responded. “Whaddya mean?”
“Save it or sell it.”
“Oh.”
“Can I help you with anything else today, sir?”
“No, I don’t guess—”
“Great. Thank you for calling technical support. Have an outstanding day.”
I tapped the disconnect icon on my display, and HotCock007 vanished. Call
Time: 2:07. As the next customer’s avatar appeared—a red-skinned, largebreasted alien female named Vartaxxx—the customer satisfaction rating that
HotCock007 had just given me appeared on my display. It was a 6, out of a
possible score of 10. The system then helpfully reminded me that I needed to
keep my average above 8.5 if I wanted to get a raise after my next review.
Doing tech support here was nothing like working from home. Here, I
couldn’t watch movies, play games, or listen to music while I answered the
endless stream of inane calls. The only distraction was staring at the clock. (Or
the IOI stock ticker, which was always at the top of every indent’s display. You
couldn’t get rid of it.)
During each shift, I was given three five-minute restroom breaks. Lunch was
thirty minutes. I usually ate in my cubicle instead of the cafeteria, so I wouldn’t
have to listen to the other tech reps bitch about their calls or boast about how
many perk points they’d earned. I’d grown to despise the other indents almost as
much as the customers.
I fell asleep five separate times during my shift. Each time, when the system
saw that I’d drifted off, it sounded a warning klaxon in my ears, jolting me back
awake. Then it noted the infraction in my employee data file. My narcolepsy had
become such a consistent problem during my first week that I was now being
issued two little red pills each day to help me stay awake. I took them too. But
not until after I got off work.
When my shift finally ended, I ripped off my headset and visor and walked
back to my hab-unit as quickly as I could. This was the only time each day I ever
hurried anywhere. When I reached my tiny plastic coffin, I crawled inside and
collapsed on the mattress, facedown, in the same exact position as the night
before. And the night before that. I lay there for a few minutes, staring at the
time readout on my entertainment console out of the corner of my eye. When it
reached 7:07 p.m., I rolled over and sat up.

“Lights,” I said softly. This had become my favorite word over the past week.
In my mind, it had become synonymous with freedom.
The lights embedded in the shell of my hab-unit shut off, plunging the tiny
compartment into darkness. If someone had been watching either of my live
security vidfeeds, they would have seen a brief flash as the cameras switched to
night-vision mode. Then I would have been clearly visible on their monitors
once again. But, thanks to some sabotage I’d performed earlier in the week, the
security cameras in my hab-unit and my eargear were now no longer performing
their assigned tasks. So for the first time that day, I wasn’t being watched.
That meant it was time to rock.
I tapped the entertainment center console’s touchscreen. It lit up, presenting
me with the same choices I’d had on my first night here: a handful of training
films and simulations, including the complete run of Tommy Queue episodes.
If anyone checked the usage logs for my entertainment center, they would
show that I watched Tommy Queue every night until I fell asleep, and that once
I’d worked my way through all sixteen episodes, I’d started over at the
beginning. The logs would also show that I fell asleep at roughly the same time
every night (but not at exactly the same time), and that I slept like the dead until
the following morning, when my alarm sounded.
Of course, I hadn’t really been watching their inane corporate shitcom every
night. And I wasn’t sleeping, either. I’d actually been operating on about two
hours of sleep a night for the past week, and it was beginning to take its toll on
me.
But the moment the lights in my hab-unit went out, I felt energized and wide
awake. My exhaustion seemed to vanish as I began to navigate through the
entertainment center operation menus from memory, the fingers of my right hand
dancing rapidly across the touchscreen.
About seven months earlier, I’d obtained a set of IOI intranet passwords from
the L33t Hax0rz Warezhaus, the same black-market data auction site where I’d
purchased the information needed to create a new identity. I kept an eye on all of
the black-market data sites, because you never knew what might be up for sale
on them. OASIS server exploits. ATM hacks. Celebrity sex tapes. You name it.
I’d been browsing through the L33t Hax0rz Warezhaus auction listings when one
in particular caught my eye: IOI Intranet Access Passwords, Back Doors, and
System Exploits. The seller claimed to be offering classified proprietary
information on IOI’s intranet architecture, along with a series of administrative
access codes and system exploits that could “give a user carte blanche inside the
company network.”
I would have assumed the data was bogus had it not been listed on such a

respected site. The anonymous seller claimed to be a former IOI contract
programmer and one of the lead architects of its company intranet. He was
probably a turncoat—a programmer who intentionally coded back doors and
security holes into a system he designed, so that he could later sell them on the
black market. It allowed him to get paid for the same job twice, and to salve any
guilt he felt about working for a demonic multinational corporation like IOI.
The obvious problem, which the seller didn’t bother to point out in the auction
listing, was that these codes were useless unless you already had access to the
company intranet. IOI’s intranet was a high-security, standalone network with no
direct connections to the OASIS. The only way to get access to IOI’s intranet
was to become one of their legitimate employees (very difficult and timeconsuming). Or you could join the company’s ever-growing ranks of indentured
servants.
I’d decided to bid on the IOI access codes anyway, on the off chance they
might come in handy someday. Since there was no way to verify the data’s
authenticity, the bidding stayed low, and I won the auction for a few thousand
credits. The codes arrived in my inbox a few minutes after the auction ended.
Once I’d finished decrypting the data, I examined it all thoroughly. Everything
looked legit, so I filed the info away for a rainy day and forgot about it—until
about six months later, when I saw the Sixer barricade around Castle Anorak.
The first thing I thought of was the IOI access codes. Then the wheels in my
head began to turn and my ridiculous plan began to take shape.
I would alter the financial records on my bogus Bryce Lynch identity and
allow myself to become indentured by IOI. Once I infiltrated the building and
got behind the company firewall, I would use the intranet passwords to hack into
the Sixers’ private database, then figure a way to bring down the shield they’d
erected over Anorak’s castle.
I didn’t think anyone would anticipate this move, because it was so clearly
insane.

I didn’t test the IOI passwords until the second night of my indenturement. I was
understandably anxious, because if it turned out I’d been sold bogus data and
none of the passwords worked, I would have sold myself into lifelong slavery.
Keeping my eargear camera pointed straight ahead, away from the screen, I
pulled up the entertainment console’s viewer settings menu, which allowed me
to make adjustments to the display’s audio and video output: volume and
balance, brightness and tint. I cranked each option up to its highest setting, then
tapped the Apply button at the bottom of the screen three times. I set the volume

and brightness controls to their lowest settings and tapped the Apply button
again. A small window appeared in the center of the screen, prompting me for a
maintenance-tech ID number and access password. I quickly entered the ID
number and the long alphanumeric password that I’d memorized. I checked both
for errors out of the corner of my eye, then tapped OK. The system paused for
what seemed like a very long time. Then, to my great relief, the following
message appeared:
MAINTENANCE CONTROL PANEL—ACCESS GRANTED
I now had access to a maintenance service account designed to allow
repairmen to test and debug the entertainment unit’s various components. I was
now logged in as a technician, but my access to the intranet was still pretty
limited. Still, it gave me all the elbow room I needed. Using an exploit left by
one of the programmers, I was now able to create a bogus admin account. Once
that was set up, I had access to just about everything.
My first order of business was to get some privacy.
I quickly navigated through several dozen submenus until I reached the
control panel for the Indent Monitoring System. When I entered my employee
number my indent profile appeared on the display, along with a mug shot they’d
taken of me during my initial processing. The profile listed my indent account
balance, pay grade, blood type, current performance review rating—every scrap
of data the company had on me. At the top right of my profile were two vidfeed
windows, one fed by the camera in my eargear, the other linked to the camera in
my hab-unit. My eargear vidfeed was currently aimed at a section of the wall.
The hab-unit camera window showed a view of the back of my head, which I’d
positioned to block the entertainment center’s display screen.
I selected both vidfeed cameras and accessed their configuration settings.
Using one of the turncoat’s exploits, I performed a quick hack that caused my
eargear and hab-unit cameras to display the archived video from my first night of
indenturement instead of a live feed. Now, if someone checked my camera feeds,
they’d see me lying asleep in my hab-unit, not sitting up all night, furiously
hacking my way through the company intranet. Then I programmed the cameras
to switch to the prerecorded feeds whenever I shut out the lights in my hab-unit.
The split-second jump cut in the feed would be masked by the momentary video
distortion that occurred when the cameras switched into night-vision mode.
I kept expecting to be discovered and locked out of the system, but it never
happened. My passwords continued to work. I’d spent the past six nights laying
siege to the IOI intranet, digging deeper and deeper into the network. I felt like a

convict in an old prison movie, returning to my cell each night to tunnel through
the wall with a teaspoon.
Then, last night, just before I’d succumbed to exhaustion, I’d finally managed
to navigate my way through the intranet’s labyrinth of firewalls and into the
main Oology Division database. The mother lode. The Sixers’ private file pile.
And tonight, I would finally be able to explore it.
I knew that I needed to be able to take some of the Sixers’ data with me when
I escaped, so earlier in the week, I’d used my intranet admin account to submit a
bogus hardware requisition form. I had a ten-zettabyte flash drive delivered to a
nonexistent employee (“Sam Lowery”) in an empty cubicle a few rows away
from my own. Making sure to keep my eargear camera pointed in the other
direction, I’d ducked into the cube, grabbed the tiny drive, pocketed it, and
smuggled it back to my hab-unit. That night, after I shut off the lights and
disabled the security cameras, I unlocked my entertainment unit’s maintenance
access panel and installed the flash drive into an expansion slot used for
firmware upgrades. Now I could download data from the intranet directly to that
drive.

I put on the entertainment center’s visor and gloves, then stretched out on my
mattress. The visor presented me with a three-dimensional view of the Sixers’
database, with dozens of overlapping data windows suspended in front of me.
Using my gloves, I began to manipulate these windows, navigating my way
through the database’s file structure. The largest section of the database appeared
to be devoted to information on Halliday. The amount of data they had on him
was staggering. It made my grail diary look like a set of CliffsNotes. They had
things I’d never seen. Things I didn’t even know existed. Halliday’s grade-school
report cards, home movies from his childhood, e-mails he’d written to fans. I
didn’t have time to read over it all, but I copied the really interesting stuff over to
my flash drive, to (hopefully) study later.
I focused on isolating the data related to Castle Anorak and the forces the
Sixers had positioned in and around it. I copied all of the intel on their weapons,
vehicles, gunships, and troop numbers. I also snagged all of the data I could find
on the Orb of Osuvox, the artifact they were using to generate the shield around
the castle, including exactly where they were keeping it and the employee
number of the Sixer wizard they had operating it.
Then I hit the jackpot—a folder containing hundreds of hours of OASIS
simcap recordings documenting the Sixers’ initial discovery of the Third Gate
and their subsequent attempts to open it. As everyone now suspected, the Third

Gate was located inside Castle Anorak. Only avatars who possessed a copy of
the Crystal Key could cross the threshold of the castle’s front entrance. To my
disgust, I learned that Sorrento had been the first avatar to set foot inside Castle
Anorak since Halliday’s death.
The castle entrance led into a massive foyer whose walls, floor, and ceiling
were all made of gold. At the north end of the chamber, a large crystal door was
set into the wall. It had a small keyhole at its very center.
The moment I saw it, I knew I was looking at the Third Gate.
I fast-forwarded through several other recent simcap files. From what I could
tell, the Sixers still hadn’t figured out how to open the gate. Simply inserting the
Crystal Key into the keyhole had no effect. They’d had their entire team trying to
figure out why for several days now, but still hadn’t made any progress.
While the data and video on the Third Gate was copying over to my flash
drive, I continued to delve deeper into the Sixer database. Eventually, I
uncovered a restricted area called the Star Chamber. It was the only area of the
database I couldn’t seem to access. So I used my admin ID to create a new “test
account,” then gave that account superuser access and full administrator
privileges. It worked and I was granted access. The information inside the
restricted area was divided into two folders: Mission Status and Threat
Assessments. I opened the Threat Assessments folder first, and when I saw what
was inside, I felt the blood drain from my face. There were five file folders,
labeled Parzival, Art3mis, Aech, Shoto, and Daito. Daito’s folder had a large red
“X” over it.
I opened the Parzival folder first. A detailed dossier appeared, containing all
of the information the Sixers had collected on me over the past few years. My
birth certificate. My school transcripts. At the bottom there was a link to a
simcap of my entire chatlink session with Sorrento, ending with the bomb
detonating in my aunt’s trailer. After I’d gone into hiding, they’d lost track of
me. They had collected thousands of screenshots and vidcaps of my avatar over
the past year, and loads of data on my stronghold on Falco, but they didn’t know
anything about my location in the real world. My current whereabouts were
listed as “unknown.”
I closed the window, took a deep breath, and opened the file on Art3mis.
At the very top was a school photo of a young girl with a distinctly sad smile.
To my surprise, she looked almost identical to her avatar. The same dark hair, the
same hazel eyes, and the same beautiful face I knew so well—with one small
difference. Most of the left half of her face was covered with a reddish-purple
birthmark. I would later learn that these types of birthmark were sometimes
referred to as “port wine stains.” In the photo, she wore a sweep of her dark hair

down over her left eye to try to conceal the mark as much as possible.
Art3mis had led me to believe that in reality she was somehow hideous, but
now I saw that nothing could have been further from the truth. To my eyes, the
birthmark did absolutely nothing to diminish her beauty. If anything, the face I
saw in the photo seemed even more beautiful to me than that of her avatar,
because I knew this one was real.
The data below the photo said that her real name was Samantha Evelyn Cook,
that she was a twenty-year-old Canadian citizen, five feet and seven inches tall,
and that she weighed one hundred and sixty-eight pounds. The file also
contained her home address—2206 Greenleaf Lane, Vancouver, British
Columbia—along with a lot of other information, including her blood type and
her school transcripts going all the way back to kindergarten.
I found an unlabeled video link at the bottom of her dossier, and when I
selected it, a live vidfeed of a small suburban house appeared on my display.
After a few seconds, I realized I was looking at the house where Art3mis lived.
As I dug further into her file, I learned that they’d had her under surveillance
for the past five months. They had her house bugged too, because I found
hundreds of hours of audio recordings made while she was logged into the
OASIS. They had complete text transcripts of every audible word she’d spoken
while clearing the first two gates.
I opened Shoto’s file next. They knew his real name, Akihide Karatsu, and
they also appeared to have his home address, an apartment building in Osaka,
Japan. His file also contained a school photo, showing a thin, stoic boy with a
shaved head. Like Daito, he looked nothing like his avatar.
Aech seemed to be the one they knew the least about. His file contained very
little information, and no photo—just a screenshot of his avatar. His real name
was listed as “Henry Swanson,” but that was an alias used by Jack Burton in Big
Trouble in Little China, so I knew it must be a fake. His address was listed as
“mobile,” and below it there was a link labeled “Recent Access Points.” This
turned out to be a list of the wireless node locations Aech had recently used to
access his OASIS account. They were all over the place: Boston; Washington,
D.C.; New York City; Philadelphia; and most recently, Pittsburgh.
Now I began to understand how the Sixers had been able to locate Art3mis
and Shoto. IOI owned hundreds of regional telecom companies, effectively
making them the largest Internet service provider in the world. It was pretty
difficult to get online without using a network they owned and operated. From
the looks of it, IOI had been illegally eavesdropping on most of the world’s
Internet traffic in an attempt to locate and identify the handful of gunters they
considered to be a threat. The only reason they hadn’t been able to locate me was

because I’d taken the paranoia-induced precaution of leasing a direct fiber-optic
connection to the OASIS from my apartment complex.
I closed Aech’s file, then opened the folder labeled Daito, already dreading
what I might find there. Like the others, they had his real name, Toshiro
Yoshiaki, and his home address. Two news articles about his “suicide” were
linked at the bottom of his dossier, along with an unlabeled video clip, timestamped on the day he’d died. I clicked on it. It was handheld video camera
footage showing three large men in black ski masks (one of whom was operating
the camera) waiting silently in a hallway. They appeared to receive an order via
their radio earpieces, then used a key card to open the door of a tiny one-room
apartment. Daito’s apartment. I watched in horror as they rushed in, yanked him
out of his haptic chair, and threw him off the balcony.
The bastards even filmed him plummeting to his death. Probably at Sorrento’s
request.
A wave of nausea washed over me. When it finally passed, I copied the
contents of all five dossiers over to my flash drive, then opened the Mission
Status folder. It appeared to contain an archive of the Oology Division’s status
reports, intended for the Sixers’ top brass. The reports were arranged by date,
with the most recent one listed first. When I opened it, I saw that it was a
directive memo sent from Nolan Sorrento to the IOI Board of Executives. In it,
Sorrento proposed sending agents to abduct Art3mis and Shoto from their homes
to force them to help IOI open the Third Gate. Once the Sixers had obtained the
egg and won the contest, Art3mis and Shoto would “be disposed of.”
I sat there in stunned silence. Then I read the memo again, feeling a
combination of rage and panic.
According to the time stamp, Sorrento had sent the memo just after eight
o’clock, less than five hours ago. So his superiors probably hadn’t even seen it
yet. When they did, they would still want to meet to discuss Sorrento’s suggested
course of action. So they probably wouldn’t send their agents after Art3mis and
Shoto until sometime tomorrow.
I still had time to warn them. But to do that, I would have to drastically alter
my escape plan.
Before my arrest, I’d set up a timed funds transfer that would deposit enough
money in my IOI credit account to pay off my entire debt, forcing IOI to release
me from indenturement. But that transfer wouldn’t happen for another five days.
By then, the Sixers would probably have Art3mis and Shoto locked in a
windowless room somewhere.
I couldn’t spend the rest of the week exploring the Sixer database, like I’d
planned. I had to grab as much data as I could and make my escape now.

I gave myself until dawn.

I worked frantically for the next four hours. Most of that time was spent
copying as much data as possible from the Sixer database to my stolen flash
drive. Once that task was completed, I submitted an Executive Oologist Supply
Requisition Order. This was an online form that Sixer commanders used to
request weapons or equipment inside the OASIS. I selected a very specific item,
then scheduled its delivery for noon two days from now.
When I finally finished, it was six thirty in the morning. The next tech-support
shift change was now only ninety minutes away, and my hab-unit neighbors
would start waking up soon. I was out of time.
I pulled up my indenturement profile, accessed my debt statement, and zeroed
out my outstanding balance—money I’d never actually borrowed to begin with.
Then I selected the Indentured Servant Observation and Communications Tag
control settings submenu, which operated both my eargear and security anklet.
Finally, I did something I’d been dying to do for the past week—I disabled the
locking mechanisms on both devices.
I felt a sharp pain as the eargear clamps retracted and pulled free of the
cartilage on my left ear. The device bounced off my shoulder and landed in my
lap. In the same instant, the shackle on my right ankle clicked open and fell off,
revealing a band of abraded red skin.
I’d now passed the point of no return. IOI security techs weren’t the only ones
who had access to my eargear’s vidfeed. The Indentured Servant Protection
Agency also used it to monitor and record my daily activities, to ensure that my
human rights were being observed. Now that I’d removed the device, there
would be no digital record of what happened to me from this moment forward. If
IOI security caught me before I made it out of the building, carrying a stolen
flash drive filled with highly incriminating company data, I was dead. The Sixers
could torture and kill me, and no one would ever know.
I performed a few final tasks related to my escape plan, then logged out of the
IOI intranet for the last time. I pulled off my visor and gloves and opened the

maintenance access panel next to the entertainment center console. There was a
small empty space below the entertainment module, between the prefab wall of
my hab-unit and the one adjacent to it. I removed the thin, neatly folded bundle
I’d hidden there. It was a vacuum-sealed IOI maintenance-tech uniform,
complete with a cap and an ID badge. (Like the flash drive, I’d obtained these
items by submitting an intranet requisition form, then had them delivered to an
empty cubicle on my floor.) I pulled off my indent jumpsuit and used it to wipe
the blood off my ear and neck. Then I removed two Band-Aids from under my
mattress and slapped them over the holes in my earlobe. Once I was dressed in
my new maintenance-tech threads, I carefully removed the flash drive from its
expansion slot and pocketed it. Then I picked up my eargear and spoke into it. “I
need to use the bathroom,” I said.
The hab-unit door irised open at my feet. The hallway was dark and deserted.
I stuffed my eargear and indent jumpsuit under the mattress and put the anklet in
the pocket of my new uniform. Then, reminding myself to breathe, I crawled
outside and descended the ladder.
I passed a few other indents on my way to the elevators, but as usual, none of
them made eye contact. This was a huge relief, because I was worried someone
might recognize me and notice that I didn’t belong in a maintenance-tech
uniform. When I stepped in front of the express elevator door, I held my breath
as the system scanned my maintenance-tech ID badge. After what felt like an
eternity, the doors slid open.
“Good morning, Mr. Tuttle,” the elevator said as I stepped inside. “Floor
please?”
“Lobby,” I said hoarsely, and the elevator began to descend.
“Harry Tuttle” was the name printed on my maintenance tech ID badge. I’d
given the fictional Mr. Tuttle complete access to the entire building, then
reprogrammed my indent anklet so that it was encoded with the Tuttle ID,
making it function just like one of the security bracelets that maintenance techs
wore. When the doors and elevators scanned me to make sure I had the proper
security clearance, the anklet in my pocket told them that yes, I sure did, instead
of doing what it was supposed to do, which was zap my ass with a few thousand
volts and incapacitate me until the security guards arrived.
I rode the elevator down in silence, trying not to stare at the camera mounted
above the doors. Then I realized the video being shot of me would be scrutinized
when this was all over. Sorrento himself would probably see it, and so would his
superiors. So I looked directly into the lens of the camera, smiled, and scratched
the bridge of my nose with my middle finger.
The elevator reached the lobby and the doors slid open. I half expected to find

an army of security guards waiting for me outside, their guns leveled at my face.
But there was only a crowd of IOI middle-management drones waiting to get on
the elevator. I stared at them blankly for a second, then stepped out of the car. It
was like crossing the border into another country.
A steady stream of overcaffeinated office workers scurried across the lobby
and in and out of the elevators and exits. These were regular employees, not
indents. They were allowed to go home at the end of their shifts. They could
even quit if they wanted to. I wondered if it bothered any of them, knowing that
thousands of indentured slaves lived and toiled here in the same building, just a
few floors away from them.
I spotted two security guards stationed near the reception desk and gave them
a wide berth, weaving my way through the thick crowd, crossing the immense
lobby to the long row of automatic glass doors that led outside, to freedom. I
forced myself not to run as I pushed through the arriving workers. Just a
maintenance tech here, folks, heading home after a long night of rebooting
routers. That’s all. I am definitely not an indent making a daring escape with ten
zettabytes of stolen company data in his pocket. Nosiree.
Halfway to the doors, I noticed an odd sound and glanced down at my feet. I
was still wearing my disposable plastic indent slippers. Each footfall made a
shrill squeak on the waxed marble floor, standing out amid the rumble of
sensible business footwear. Every step I took seemed to scream: Hey, look! Over
here! A guy in the plastic slippers!
But I kept walking. I was almost to the doors when someone placed a hand on
my shoulder. I froze. “Sir?” I heard someone say. It was a woman’s voice.
I almost bolted out the door, but something about the woman’s tone stopped
me. I turned and saw the concerned face of a tall woman in her midforties. Dark
blue business suit. Briefcase. “Sir, your ear is bleeding.” She pointed at it,
wincing. “A lot.”
I reached up and touched my earlobe, and my hand came away red. At some
point, the Band-Aids I’d applied had fallen off.
I was paralyzed for a second, unsure of what to do. I wanted to give her an
explanation, but couldn’t think of one. So I simply nodded, muttered “thanks,”
then turned around and, as calmly as possible, walked outside.
The frozen morning wind was so fierce that it nearly knocked me over. When
I regained my balance, I bounded down the tiered steps, pausing briefly to drop
my anklet into a trash receptacle. I heard it hit the bottom with a satisfying thud.
Once I reached the street, I headed north, walking as fast as my feet would
carry me. I was somewhat conspicuous because I was the only person not
wearing a coat of some kind. My feet quickly went numb, because I also wasn’t

wearing socks under my plastic indent slippers.
My entire body was shivering by the time I finally reached the warm confines
of the Mailbox, a post office box rental outlet located four blocks from the IOI
plaza. The week before my arrest, I’d rented a post office box here online and
had a top-of-the-line portable OASIS rig shipped to it. The Mailbox was
completely automated, so there were no employees to contend with, and when I
walked in there were no customers either. I located my box, punched in the key
code, and retrieved the portable OASIS rig. I sat down on the floor and ripped
open the package right there. I rubbed my frozen hands together until the feeling
returned to my fingers, then put on the gloves and visor and used the rig to log
into the OASIS. Gregarious Simulation Systems was located less than a mile
away, so I was able to use one of their complimentary wireless access points
instead of one of the city nodes owned by IOI.
My heart was pounding as I logged in. I’d been offline for eight whole days—
a personal record. As my avatar slowly materialized on my stronghold’s
observation deck, I looked down at my virtual body, admiring it like a favorite
suit I hadn’t worn in a while. A window immediately appeared on my display,
informing me that I’d received several messages from Aech and Shoto. And, to
my surprise, there was even a message from Art3mis. All three of them wanted
to know where I was and what the hell had happened to me.
I replied to Art3mis first. I told her that the Sixers knew who she was and
where she lived and that they had her under constant surveillance. I also warned
her about their plans to abduct her from her home. I pulled a copy of her dossier
off the flash drive and attached it to my message as proof. Then I politely
suggested that she leave home immediately and get the hell out of Dodge.
Don’t stop to pack a suitcase, I wrote. Don’t say good-bye to anyone. Leave
right now, and get somewhere safe. Make sure you aren’t followed. Then find a
secure non-IOI-controlled Internet connection and get back online. I’ll meet you
in Aech’s Basement as soon as I can. Don’t worry—I have some good news too.
At the bottom of the message, I added a short postscript: PS—I think you look
even more beautiful in real life.
I sent similar e-mails to Shoto and Aech (minus the postscript), along with
copies of their Sixer dossiers. Then I pulled up the United States Citizen
Registry database and attempted to log in. To my great relief, the passwords I’d
purchased still worked, and I was able to access the fake Bryce Lynch citizen
profile I’d created. It now contained the ID photo taken during my indent
processing, and the words WANTED FUGITIVE were superimposed over my face.
IOI had already reported Mr. Lynch as an escaped indent.
It didn’t take me very long to completely erase the Bryce Lynch identity and

copy my fingerprints and retinal patterns back over to my original citizen profile.
When I logged out of the database a few minutes later, Bryce Lynch no longer
existed. I was Wade Watts once again.

I hailed an autocab outside the Mailbox, making sure to select one operated by a
local cab company and not a SupraCab, which was a wholly owned subsidiary of
IOI.
When I got in, I held my breath as I pressed my thumb to the ID scanner. The
display flashed green. The system recognized me as Wade Watts, not as the
fugitive indent Bryce Lynch.
“Good morning, Mr. Watts,” the autocab said. “Where to?”
I gave the cab the address of a clothing store on High Street, close to the OSU
campus. It was a place called Thr3ads, which specialized in “high-tech urban
street wear.” I ran inside and bought a pair of jeans and a sweater. Both items
were “dichotomy wear,” meaning they were wired for OASIS use. They didn’t
have haptics, but the pants and shirt could link up with my portable immersion
rig, letting it know what I was doing with my torso, arms, and legs, making it
easier to control my avatar than with a gloves-only interface. I also bought a few
packs of socks and underwear, a simulated leather jacket, a pair of boots, and a
black knit-wool cap to cover my freezing, stubble-covered noggin.
I emerged from the store a few minutes later dressed in my new threads. As
the frigid wind enveloped me again I zipped up my new jacket and pulled on the
wool cap. Much better. I tossed the maintenance-tech jumpsuit and plastic indent
shoes in a trash can, then began to walk up High Street, scanning the storefronts.
I kept my head down to avoid making eye contact with the stream of sullen
university students filing past me.
A few blocks later, I ducked into a Vend-All franchise. Inside there were rows
of vending machines that sold everything under the sun. One of them, labeled
DEFENSE DISPENSER, offered self-defense equipment: lightweight body armor,
chemical repellents, and a wide selection of handguns. I tapped the screen set
into the front of the machine and scrolled through the catalog. After a moment’s
deliberation, I purchased a flak vest and a Glock 47C pistol, along with three
clips of ammo. I also bought a small canister of mace, then paid for everything
by pressing my right palm to a hand scanner. My identity was verified and my
criminal record was checked.
NAME: WADE WATTS
OUTSTANDING WARRANTS: NONE

CREDIT RATING: EXCELLENT
PURCHASE RESTRICTIONS: NONE
TRANSACTION APPROVED!
THANK YOU FOR YOUR BUSINESS!
I heard a heavy metallic thunk as my purchases slid into the steel tray near my
knees. I pocketed the mace and put the flak vest on underneath my new shirt.
Then I removed the Glock from its clear plastic blister packaging. This was the
first time I’d ever held a real gun. Even so, the weapon felt familiar in my hands,
because I’d fired thousands of virtual firearms in the OASIS. I pressed a small
button set into the barrel and the gun emitted a tone. I held the pistol grip firmly
for a few seconds, first in my right hand, then my left. The weapon emitted a
second tone, letting me know it had finished scanning my handprints. I was now
the only person who could fire it. The weapon had a built-in timer that would
prevent it from firing for another twelve hours (a “cooling-off period”), but I still
felt better having it on me.
I walked to an OASIS parlor located a few blocks away, a franchise outlet
called the Plug. The dingy backlit sign, which featured a smiling
anthropomorphic fiber-optic cable, promised Lightning-Fast OASIS Access!
Cheap Gear Rental! and Private Immersion Bays! Open 24-7-365! I’d seen a lot
of banner ads for the Plug online. They had a reputation for high prices and
outdated hardware, but their connections were supposed to be fast, reliable, and
lag-free. For me, their major selling point was that they were one of the few
OASIS parlor chains not owned by IOI or one of its subsidiaries.
The motion detector emitted a beep as I stepped through the front door. There
was a small waiting area off to my right, currently empty. The carpet was stained
and worn, and the whole place reeked of industrial-strength disinfectant. A
vacant-eyed clerk glanced up at me from behind a bulletproof Plexiglas barrier.
He was in his early twenties, with a Mohawk and dozens of facial piercings. He
was wearing a bifocal visor, which gave him a semitransparent view of the
OASIS while also allowing him to see his real-world surroundings. When he
spoke, I saw that his teeth had all been sharpened to points. “Welcome to the
Plug,” he said in a flat monotone. “We have several bays free, so there’s no
waiting. Package pricing information is displayed right here.” He pointed to the
display screen mounted on the counter directly in front of me; then his eyes
glazed over as he refocused his attention on the world inside his visor.
I scanned my choices. A dozen immersion rigs were available, of varying
quality and price. Economy, Standard, Deluxe. I was given detailed specs on
each. You could rent by the minute, or pay a flat hourly rate. A visor and a pair

of haptic gloves were included in the rental price, but a haptic suit cost extra.
The rental contract contained a lot of fine print about the additional charges you
would incur if you damaged the equipment, and a lot of legalese stating that the
Plug could not be held responsible for anything you did, under any
circumstances, especially if it was something illegal.
“I’d like to rent one of the deluxe rigs for twelve hours,” I said.
The clerk raised his visor. “You have to pay in advance, you realize?”
I nodded. “I also want to rent a fat-pipe connection. I need to upload a large
amount of data to my account.”
“Uploading costs extra. How much data?”
“Ten zettabytes.”
“Damn,” he whispered. “What you uploading? The Library of Congress?”
I ignored the question. “I also want the Mondo Upgrade Package,” I said.
“Sure thing,” the clerk replied warily. “Your total comes to eleven thousand
big ones. Just put your thumb on the drum and we’ll get you all fixed up.”
He looked more than a little surprised when the transaction cleared. Then he
shrugged and handed me a key card, a visor, and some gloves. “Bay fourteen.
Last door on your right. The restroom is at the end of the hall. If you leave any
kind of mess in the bay, we’ll have to keep your deposit. Vomit, urine, semen,
that kinda thing. And I’m the guy who has to clean it up, so do me a solid and
show some restraint, will ya?”
“You got it.”
“Enjoy.”
“Thanks.”
Bay fourteen was a soundproofed ten-by-ten room with a late-model haptic rig
in the center. I locked the door behind me and climbed into the rig. The vinyl on
the haptic chair was worn and cracked. I slid the data drive into a slot on the
front of the OASIS console and smiled as it locked into place.
“Max?” I said to the empty air, once I’d logged back in. This booted up a
backup of Max that I kept stored in my OASIS account.
Max’s smiling face appeared on all of my command center monitors. “H-hhey there, compadre!” he stuttered. “H-h-how goes it?”
“Things are looking up, pal. Now strap in. We’ve got a lot of work to do.”
I opened up my OASIS account manager and initiated the upload from my
flash drive. I paid GSS a monthly fee for unlimited data storage on my account,
and I was about to test its limits. Even using the Plug’s high-bandwidth fiberoptic connection, the total estimated upload time for ten zettabytes of data was
over three hours. I reordered the upload sequence so the files I needed access to
right away would get transferred first. As soon as data was uploaded to my

OASIS account I had immediate access to it and could also transfer it to other
users instantaneously.
First, I e-mailed all of the major newsfeeds a detailed account of how IOI had
tried to kill me, how they had killed Daito, and how they were planning to kill
Art3mis and Shoto. I attached one of the video clips I’d retrieved from the Sixer
database to the message—the video camera footage of Daito’s execution. I also
attached a copy of the memo Sorrento had sent to the IOI board, suggesting that
they abduct Art3mis and Shoto. Finally, I attached the simcap of my chatlink
session with Sorrento, but I bleeped the part where he said my real name and
blurred the image of my school photo. I wasn’t yet ready to reveal my true
identity to the world. I planned to release the unedited video later, once the rest
of my plan had played out. Then it wouldn’t matter.
I spent about fifteen minutes composing one last e-mail, which I addressed to
every single OASIS user. Once I was happy with the wording, I stored it in my
Drafts folder. Then I logged into Aech’s Basement.
When my avatar appeared inside the chat room, I saw that Aech, Art3mis, and
Shoto were already there waiting for me.

“Z!” Aech shouted as my avatar appeared. “What the hell, man? Where
have you been? I’ve been trying to reach you for over a week!”
“So have I,” Shoto added. “Where were you? And how did you get those files
from the Sixer database?”
“It’s a long story,” I said. “First things first.” I addressed Shoto and Art3mis.
“Have you two left your homes?”
They both nodded.
“And you’re each logged in from a safe location?”
“Yes,” Shoto said. “I’m in a manga cafe right now.”
“And I’m at the Vancouver airport,” Art3mis said. It was the first time I’d
heard her voice in months. “I’m logged in from a germ-ridden public OASIS
booth right now. I ran out of my house with nothing but the clothes on my back,
so I hope that Sixer data you sent us is legit.”
“It is,” I said. “Trust me.”
“How can you be sure of that?” Shoto asked.
“Because I hacked into the Sixer Database and downloaded it myself.”
They all stared at me in silence. Aech raised an eyebrow. “And how, exactly,
did you manage that, Z?”
“I assumed a fake identity and masqueraded as an indentured servant to
infiltrate IOI’s corporate headquarters. I’ve been there for the past eight days. I
just now escaped.”
“Holy shit!” Shoto whispered. “Seriously?”
I nodded.
“Dude, you have balls of solid adamantium,” Aech said. “Respect.”
“Thanks. I think.”
“Let’s assume you’re not totally bullshitting us,” Art3mis said. “How does a
lowly indent get access to secret Sixer dossier files and company memos?”
I turned to face her. “Indents have limited access to the company intranet via
their hab-unit entertainment system, from behind the IOI firewall. From there, I

was able to use a series of back doors and system exploits left by the original
programmers to tunnel through the network and hack directly into the Sixers’
private database.”
Shoto looked at me in awe. “You did that? All by yourself?”
“That is correct, sir.”
“It’s a miracle they didn’t catch you and kill you,” Art3mis said. “Why would
you take such a stupid risk?”
“Why do you think? To try and find a way to get through their shield and
reach the Third Gate.” I shrugged. “It was the only plan I could come up with on
such short notice.”
“Z,” Aech said, grinning, “you are one crazy son of a bitch.” He walked over
and gave me a high five. “But that’s why I love you, man!”
Art3mis scowled at me. “Of course, when you found out they had secret files
on each of us, you just couldn’t resist looking at them, could you?”
“I had to look at them!” I said. “To find out how much they knew about each
of us! You would have done the same thing.”
She leveled a finger at me. “No, I wouldn’t have. I respect other people’s
privacy!”
“Art3mis, chill out!” Aech interjected. “He probably saved your life, you
know.”
She seemed to consider this. “Fine,” she said. “Forget it.” But I could tell she
was still pissed off.
I didn’t know what to say, so I kept plowing forward.
“I’m sending each of you a copy of all the Sixer data I smuggled out. Ten
zettabytes of it. You should have it now.” I waited while each of them checked
their inbox. “The size of their database on Halliday is unreal. His whole life is in
there. They’ve collected interviews with everyone Halliday ever knew. It could
take months to read through them all.”
I waited for a few minutes, watching their eyes scan over the data.
“Whoa!” Shoto said. “This is incredible.” He looked over at me. “How the
hell did you escape from IOI with all of this stuff?”
“By being extra sneaky.”
“Aech is right,” Art3mis said, shaking her head. “You are certifiably nuts.”
She hesitated for a second, then added, “Thanks for the warning, Z. I owe you
one.”
I opened my mouth to say “you’re welcome,” but no words came out.
“Yes,” Shoto said. “So do I. Thanks.”
“Don’t mention it, guys,” I finally managed to say.
“Well?” Aech said. “Hit us with the bad news already. How close are the

Sixers to clearing the Third Gate?”
“Dig this,” I said, grinning. “They haven’t even figured out how to open it
yet.”
Art3mis and Shoto stared at me in disbelief. Aech smiled wide, then began to
bob his head and press his palms to the sky, as if dancing to some unheard rave
track. “Oh yes! Oh yes!” he sang.
“You’re kidding, right?” Shoto asked.
I shook my head.
“You’re not kidding?” Art3mis said. “How is that possible? Sorrento has the
Crystal Key and he knows where the gate is. All he has to do is open the damn
thing and step inside, right?”
“That was true for the first two gates,” I replied. “But Gate Three is different.”
I opened a large vidfeed window in the air beside me. “Check this out. It’s from
the Sixers’ video archive. It’s a vidcap of their first attempt to open the gate.”
I hit Play. The video clip opened with a shot of Sorrento’s avatar standing
outside the front gates of Castle Anorak. The castle’s front entrance, which had
been impregnable for so many years, swung open as Sorrento approached, like
an automatic door at a supermarket. “The castle entrance will open for an avatar
who holds a copy of the Crystal Key,” I explained. “If an avatar doesn’t have a
copy of the key, he can’t cross the threshold and enter the castle, even if the
doors are already open.”
We all watched the vidcap as Sorrento passed through the entrance and into
the large gold-lined foyer that lay beyond. Sorrento’s avatar crossed the polished
floor and approached the large crystal door set into the north wall. There was a
keyhole in the very center of the door, and directly above it, three words were
etched into the door’s glittering, faceted surface: CHARITY. HOPE. FAITH.
Sorrento stepped forward, holding out his copy of the Crystal Key. He slid the
key into the keyhole and turned it. Nothing happened.
Sorrento glanced up at the three words printed on the gate. “Charity, hope,
faith,” he said, reading them aloud. Once again, nothing happened.
Sorrento removed the key, recited the three words again, then reinserted the
key and turned it. Still nothing.
I studied Aech, Art3mis, and Shoto as they watched the video. Their
excitement and curiosity had already shifted into concentration as they attempted
to solve the puzzle before them. I paused the video. “Whenever Sorrento is
logged in, he has a team of consultants and researchers watching his every
move,” I said. “You can hear their voices on some of the vidcaps, feeding him
suggestions and advice through his comlink. So far, they haven’t been much
help. Watch—”

On the video, Sorrento was making another attempt to open the gate. He did
everything exactly as before, except this time, when he inserted the Crystal Key,
he turned it counterclockwise instead of clockwise.
“They try every asinine thing you can imagine,” I said. “Sorrento recites the
words on the gate in Latin. And Elvish. And Klingon. Then they get hung up on
reciting First Corinthians 13:13, a Bible verse that contains the words ‘charity,
hope, and faith.’ Apparently, ‘charity, hope, and faith’ are also the names of three
martyred Catholic saints. The Sixers have been trying to attach some
significance to that for the past few days.”
“Morons,” Aech said. “Halliday was an atheist.”
“They’re getting desperate now,” I said. “Sorrento has tried everything but
genuflecting, doing a little dance, and sticking his pinky finger in the keyhole.”
“That’s probably next up on his agenda,” Shoto said, grinning.
“Charity, hope, faith,” Art3mis said, reciting the words slowly. She turned to
me. “Where do I know that from?”
“Yeah,” Aech said. “Those words do sound familiar.”
“It took me a while to place them too,” I said.
They all looked at me expectantly.
“Say them in reverse order,” I suggested. “Better yet, sing them in reverse
order.”
Art3mis’s eyes narrowed. “Faith, hope, charity,” she said. She repeated them
a few times, recognition growing in her face. Then she sang: “Faith and hope
and charity …”
Aech picked up the next line: “The heart and the brain and the body …”
“Give you three … as a magic number!” Shoto finished triumphantly.
“Schoolhouse Rock!” they all shouted in unison.
“See?” I said. “I knew you guys would get it. You’re a smart bunch.”
“ ‘Three Is a Magic Number,’ music and lyrics by Bob Dorough,” Art3mis
recited, as if pulling the information from a mental encyclopedia. “Written in
1973.”
I smiled at her. “I have a theory. I think this might be Halliday’s way of telling
us how many keys are required to open the Third Gate.”
Art3mis grinned, then sang, “It takes three.”
“No more, no less,” continued Shoto.
“You don’t have to guess,” added Aech.
“Three,” I finished, “is the magic number.” I took out my own copy of the
Crystal Key and held it up. The others did the same. “We have four copies of the
key. If at least three of us can reach the gate, we can get it open.”
“What then?” Aech asked. “Do we all enter the gate at the same time?”

“What if only one of us can enter the gate once it’s open?” Art3mis said.
“I doubt Halliday would have set it up like that,” I said.
“Who knows what that crazy bastard was thinking?” Art3mis said. “He’s
toyed with us every step of the way, and now he’s doing it again. Why else
would he require three copies of the Crystal Key to open the final gate?”
“Maybe because he wanted to force us to work together?” I suggested.
“Or he just wanted the contest to end with a big, dramatic finale,” Aech
offered. “Think about it. If three avatars enter the Third Gate at the exact same
moment, then it becomes a race to see who can clear the gate and reach the egg
first.”
“Halliday was one crazy, sadistic bastard,” Art3mis muttered.
“Yeah,” Aech said, nodding. “You got that right.”
“Look at it this way,” Shoto said. “If Halliday hadn’t set up the Third Gate to
require three keys … the Sixers might have already found the egg by now.”
“But the Sixers have a dozen avatars with copies of the Crystal Key,” Aech
said. “They could open the gate right now, if they were smart enough to figure
out how.”
“Dilettantes,” Art3mis said. “It’s their own fault for not knowing all the
Schoolhouse Rock! lyrics by heart. How did those fools even get this far?”
“By cheating,” I said. “Remember?”
“Oh, that’s right. I keep forgetting.” She grinned at me, and I felt my knees go
all rubbery.
“Just because the Sixers haven’t opened the gate yet doesn’t mean they won’t
figure it out eventually,” Shoto said.
I nodded. “Shoto’s right. Sooner or later they’ll make the Schoolhouse Rock!
connection. So we can’t waste any more time.”
“Well, what are we waiting for?” Shoto said excitedly. “We know where the
gate is and how to open it! So let’s do it! And may the best gunter win!”
“You’re forgetting something, Shoto-san,” Aech said. “Parzival here still
hasn’t told us how we’re going to get past that shield, fight our way through the
Sixers’ army, and get inside the castle.” He turned to me. “You do have a plan for
that, don’t you, Z?”
“Of course,” I said. “I was just getting to that.” I made a sweeping gesture
with my right hand, and a three-dimensional hologram of Castle Anorak
appeared, floating in the air in front of me. The transparent blue sphere
generated by the Orb of Osuvox appeared around the castle, surrounding it both
above- and belowground. I pointed to it. “This shield is going to drop on its own,
at noon on Monday, about thirty-six hours from now. And then we’re going to
walk right through the castle’s front entrance.”

“The shield is going to drop? On its own?” Art3mis repeated. “The clans have
been lobbing nukes at that sphere for the past two weeks, and they haven’t even
scratched it. How are you going to get it to ‘drop on its own’?”
“I’ve already taken care of it,” I said. “You guys are gonna have to trust me.”
“I trust you, Z,” Aech said. “But even if that shield does drop, to reach the
castle, we’ll still have to fight our way through the largest army in the OASIS.”
He pointed to the hologram, which showed the Sixer troop positions around the
castle, just inside the sphere. “What about these fools? And their tanks? And
their gunships?”
“Obviously, we’re going to need a little help,” I said.
“A lot of help,” Art3mis clarified.
“And who, exactly, are we going to convince to help us wage war against the
entire Sixer army?” Aech asked.
“Everyone,” I said. “Every single gunter on the grid.” I opened another
window, displaying the brief e-mail I’d composed just before logging into the
Basement. “I’m going to send this message out tonight, to every single OASIS
user.”
Fellow gunters,
It is a dark day. After years of deception, exploitation, and knavery, the
Sixers have finally managed to buy and cheat their way to the entrance of
the Third Gate.
As you know, IOI has barricaded Castle Anorak in an attempt to prevent
anyone else from reaching the egg. We’ve also learned that they’ve used
illegal methods to uncover the identities of gunters they consider a threat,
with the intention of abducting and murdering them.
If gunters around the world don’t join forces to stop the Sixers, they will
reach the egg and win the contest. And then the OASIS will fall under IOI’s
imperialist rule.
The time is now. Our assault on the Sixer army will begin tomorrow at
noon, OST.
Join us!
Sincerely,

Aech, Art3mis, Parzival, and Shoto
“Knavery?” Art3mis said after she’d finished reading it. “Were you using a
thesaurus when you wrote this?”
“I was trying to make it sound, you know, grand,” I said. “Official.”
“Me likey, Z,” Aech said. “It really gets the blood stirring.”
“Thanks, Aech.”
“So that’s it? This is your plan?” Art3mis said. “Spam the entire OASIS,
asking for help?”
“More or less, yeah. That’s the plan.”
“And you really think everyone will just show up and help us fight the
Sixers?” she said. “Just for the hell of it?”
“Yes,” I said. “I do.”
Aech nodded. “He’s right. No one wants the Sixers to win the contest. And
they definitely don’t want IOI to take control of the OASIS. People will jump at
a chance to help bring the Sixers down. And what gunter is gonna pass up a
chance to fight in such an epic, history-making battle?”
“But won’t the clans think we’re just trying to manipulate them?” Shoto said.
“So that we can reach the gate ourselves?”
“Of course,” I said. “But most of them have already given up. Everyone
knows the end of the Hunt is at hand. Don’t you think most people would rather
see one of us win the contest, instead of Sorrento and the Sixers?”
Art3mis considered it for a moment. “You’re right. That e-mail just might
work.”
“Z,” Aech said, slapping me on the back, “you are an evil, sublime genius!
When that e-mail goes out, the media will go apeshit! The word will spread like
wildfire. By this time tomorrow, every avatar in the OASIS will be headed to
Chthonia.”
“Let’s hope so,” I said.
“Oh, they’ll show up, all right,” Art3mis said. “But how many of them will
actually fight, once they see what we’re up against? Most of them will probably
set up lawn chairs and eat popcorn while they watch us get our asses kicked.”
“That’s definitely a possibility,” I said. “But the clans will help us, for sure.
They’ve got nothing to lose. And we don’t have to defeat the entire Sixer army.
We just have to punch a hole through it, get inside the castle, and reach the gate.”
“Three of us have to reach the gate,” Aech said. “If only one or two of us
make it inside, we’re screwed.”
“Correct,” I said. “So we should all try extremely hard not to get killed.”
Art3mis and Aech both laughed nervously. Shoto just shook his head. “Even if

we get the gate open, we still have to contend with the gate itself,” he said. “It’s
bound to be harder to clear than the first two.”
“Let’s worry about the gate later,” I said. “Once we reach it.”
“Fine,” Shoto said. “Let’s do this thing.”
“I second that,” Aech said.
“So, you two are actually gonna go along with this?” Art3mis said.
“You got a better idea, sister?” Aech asked.
She shrugged. “No. Not really.”
“OK then,” Aech said. “It’s settled.”
I closed the e-mail. “I’m sending each of you a copy of this message,” I said.
“Start sending it out tonight, to everyone on your contact list. Post it on your
blogs. Broadcast it on your POV channels. We’ve got thirty-six hours to spread
the word. That should be enough time for everyone to gear up and get their
avatars to Chthonia.”
“As soon as the Sixers catch wind of this, they’ll start preparing for an
assault,” Art3mis said. “They’re gonna pull out all the stops.”
“They might just laugh it off,” I said. “They think their shield is impregnable.”
“It is,” Art3mis said. “So I hope you’re right about being able to shut it
down.”
“Don’t worry.”
“Why would I be worried?” Art3mis snapped. “Maybe you’ve forgotten, but
I’m homeless and on the run for my life right now! I’m currently logged in from
a public terminal at an airport, paying for bandwidth by the minute. I can’t fight
a war from here, much less try to clear the Third Gate. And I don’t have
anywhere to go.”
Shoto nodded. “I don’t think I can stay where I am either. I’m in a rented
booth at a public manga cafe in Osaka. I don’t have much privacy. And I don’t
think it’s safe for me to stay here if the Sixers have agents out looking for me.”
Art3mis looked at me. “Any suggestions?”
“I hate to break it to you guys, but I’m homeless and logged in from a public
terminal right now too,” I said. “I’ve been hiding out from the Sixers for over a
year, remember?”
“I’ve got an RV,” Aech said. “You’re all welcome to crash with me. But I
don’t think I can make it to Columbus, Vancouver, and Japan in the next thirtysix hours.”
“I think I might be able to help you guys out,” a deep voice said.
We all jumped and turned around just in time to see a tall, male, gray-haired
avatar appear directly behind us. It was the Great and Powerful Og. Ogden
Morrow’s avatar. And he didn’t materialize slowly, the way an avatar normally

did when logging into a chat room. He simply popped into existence, as if he had
been there all along and had only now decided to make himself visible.
“Have any of you ever been to Oregon?” he said. “It’s lovely this time of
year.”

We all stared at Ogden Morrow in stunned silence.
“How did you get in here?” Aech finally asked, once he’d managed to pick his
jaw up off the floor. “This is a private chat room.”
“Yes, I know,” Morrow said, looking a bit embarrassed. “I’m afraid I’ve been
eavesdropping on the four of you for quite some time now. And I hope you’ll
accept my sincere apologies for invading your privacy. I did it with only the best
intentions, I promise you.”
“With all due respect, sir,” Art3mis said. “You didn’t answer his question.
How did you gain access to this chat room without an invitation? And without
any of us even knowing you were here?”
“Forgive me,” he said. “I can see why this might concern you. But you
needn’t worry. My avatar has many unique powers, including the ability to enter
private chat rooms uninvited.” As Morrow spoke, he walked over to one of
Aech’s bookshelves and began to browse through some vintage role-playing
game supplements. “Prior to the original launch of the OASIS, when Jim and I
created our avatars, we gave ourselves superuser access to the entire simulation.
In addition to being immortal and invincible, our avatars could go pretty much
anywhere and do pretty much anything. Now that Anorak is gone, my avatar is
the only one with these powers.” He turned to face the four of us. “No one else
has the ability to eavesdrop on you. Especially not the Sixers. OASIS chat-room
encryption protocols are rock solid, I assure you.” He chuckled lightly. “My
presence here notwithstanding.”
“He knocked over that stack of comic books!” I said to Aech. “After our first
meeting in here, remember? I told you it wasn’t a software glitch.”
Og nodded and gave us a guilty shrug. “That was me. I can be pretty clumsy
at times.”
There was another brief silence, during which I finally worked up the courage
to speak to Morrow directly. “Mr. Morrow—,” I began.
“Please,” Morrow said, raising a hand. “Call me Og.”

“All right,” I said, laughing nervously. Even under the circumstances, I was
completely starstruck. I couldn’t believe I was actually addressing the Ogden
Morrow. “Og. Would you mind telling us why you’ve been eavesdropping on
us?”
“Because I want to help you,” he replied. “And from what I heard a moment
ago, it sounds as though you could all use my help.” We all exchanged nervous
looks, and Og seemed to detect our skepticism. “Please, don’t misunderstand
me,” he continued. “I’m not going to give you any clues, or provide you with
any information to help you reach the egg. That would ruin all the fun, wouldn’t
it?” He walked back over to us, and his tone turned serious. “Just before he died,
I promised Jim that, in his absence, I would do everything I could to protect the
spirit and integrity of his contest. That’s why I’m here.”
“But, sir—Og,” I said. “In your autobiography, you wrote that you and James
Halliday didn’t speak during the last ten years of his life.”
Morrow gave me an amused smile. “Come on, kid,” he said. “You can’t
believe everything you read.” He laughed. “Actually, that statement was mostly
true. I didn’t speak with Jim for the last decade of his life. Not until just a few
weeks before he died.” He paused, as if calling up the memory. “At the time, I
didn’t even know he was sick. He just called me up out of the blue, and we met
in a private chat room, much like this one. Then he told me about his illness, the
contest, and what he had planned. He was worried there might still be a few bugs
in the gates. Or that complications might arise after he was gone that would
prevent the contest from proceeding as he’d intended.”
“You mean like the Sixers?” Shoto asked.
“Exactly,” Og said. “Like the Sixers. So Jim asked me to monitor the contest,
and to intervene if it ever became necessary.” He scratched his beard. “To be
honest, I didn’t really want the responsibility. But it was the dying wish of my
oldest friend, so I agreed. And for the past six years, I’ve watched from the
sidelines. And even though the Sixers have done everything to stack the odds
against you, somehow you four have persevered. But now, after hearing you
describe your current circumstances, I think the time has finally come for me to
take action, to maintain the integrity of Jim’s game.”
Art3mis, Shoto, Aech, and I all exchanged looks of amazement, as if seeking
reassurance from one another that this was all really happening.
“I want to offer the four of you sanctuary at my home here in Oregon,” Og
said. “From here, you’ll be able to execute your plan and complete your quest in
safety, without having to worry about Sixer agents tracking you down and
kicking in your door. I can provide each of you with a state-of-the-art immersion
rig, a fiber-optic connection to the OASIS, and anything else you might need.”

Another stunned silence. “Thank you, sir!” I finally blurted out, resisting the
urge to fall to my knees and bow repeatedly.
“It’s the least I can do.”
“That’s an incredibly kind offer, Mr. Morrow,” Shoto said. “But I live in
Japan.”
“I know, Shoto,” Og said. “I’ve already chartered a private jet for you. It’s
waiting at the Osaka airport. If you send me your current location, I’ll arrange
for a limo to pick you up and take you to the runway.”
Shoto was speechless for a second; then he bowed low. “Arigato, Morrowsan.”
“Don’t mention it, kid.” He turned to Art3mis. “Young lady, I understand that
you’re currently at the Vancouver airport? I’ve made travel arrangements for
you, as well. A driver is currently waiting for you in the baggage claim area,
holding a sign with the name ‘Benatar’ on it. He’ll take you to the plane I’ve
chartered for you.”
For a second I thought Art3mis might bow too. But then she ran over and
threw her arms around Og in a bear hug. “Thank you, Og,” she said. “Thank
you, thank you, thank you!”
“You’re welcome, dear,” he said with an embarrassed laugh. When she finally
released him, he turned to Aech and me. “Aech, I understand that you have a
vehicle, and that you’re currently in the vicinity of Pittsburgh?” Aech nodded.
“If you wouldn’t mind driving to Columbus to retrieve your friend Parzival here,
I’ll arrange for a jet to pick up both of you at the Columbus airport. That is, if
you boys don’t mind sharing a ride?”
“No, that sounds perfect,” Aech said, glancing at me sideways. “Thanks, Og.”
“Yes, thank you,” I repeated. “You’re a lifesaver.”
“I hope so.” He gave me a grim smile, then turned to address everyone. “Safe
travels, all of you. I’ll see you soon.” And then he vanished, just as quickly as
he’d appeared.
“Well, this blows,” I said, turning to Aech. “Art3mis and Shoto get limos, and
I have to bum a ride to the airport with your ugly ass? In some shit-heap RV?”
“It’s not a shit-heap,” Aech said, laughing. “And you’re welcome to take a
cab, asshole.”
“This is gonna be interesting,” I said, stealing a quick glance at Art3mis. “The
four of us are finally going to meet in person.”
“It will be an honor,” Shoto said. “I’m looking forward to it.”
“Yeah,” Art3mis said, locking eyes with me. “I can’t wait.”

After Shoto and Art3mis logged out, I gave Aech my current location. “It’s a
Plug franchise. Call me when you get here, and I’ll meet you out front.”
“Will do,” he said. “Listen, I should warn you. I don’t look anything like my
avatar.”
“So? Who does? I’m not really this tall. Or muscular. And my nose is slightly
bigger—”
“I’m just warning you. Meeting me might be … kind of a shock for you.”
“OK. Then why don’t you just tell me what you look like right now?”
“I’m already on the road,” he said, ignoring my question. “I’ll see you in a
few hours, OK?”
“OK. Drive safe, amigo.”
Despite what I’d said to Aech, knowing that I was about to meet him in person
after all these years made me more nervous than I wanted to admit. But it was
nothing compared to the apprehension I already felt building inside me at the
prospect of meeting Art3mis once we reached Oregon. Trying to picture the
actual moment filled me with a mixture of excitement and abject terror. What
would she be like in person? Was the photo I’d seen in her file actually a fake?
Did I still have any kind of chance with her at all?
With a Herculean effort, I managed to put her out of my mind by forcing
myself to focus on the approaching battle.
As soon as I logged out of Aech’s Basement, I sent out my “Call to Arms” email as a global announcement to every OASIS user. Knowing most of those emails wouldn’t get through the spam filters, I also posted it to every gunter
message board. Then I made a short vidcap recording of my avatar reading it
aloud and set it to run on a continuous loop on my POV channel.
The word spread quickly. Within an hour, our plan to assault Castle Anorak
was the top story on every single newsfeed, accompanied by headlines like
GUNTERS DECLARE ALL-OUT WAR ON THE SIXERS and TOP GUNTERS ACCUSE IOI OF
KIDNAPPING AND MURDER and IS THE HUNT FOR HALLIDAY’S EGG FINALLY OVER?
Some of the newsfeeds were already running the video clip of Daito’s murder
I’d sent them, along with the text of Sorrento’s memo, citing an anonymous
source for both. So far, IOI had declined to comment on either. By now, Sorrento
would know I’d somehow gained access to the Sixers’ private database. I wished
I could see his face when he learned how I’d done it—that I’d spent an entire
week just a few floors below his office.
I spent the next few hours outfitting my avatar and preparing myself mentally
for what was to come. When I could no longer keep my eyes open, I decided to
catch a quick nap while I waited for Aech to arrive. I disabled the auto-log-out

feature on my account, then drifted off in the haptic chair with my new jacket
draped over me as a blanket, clutching in one hand the pistol I’d purchased
earlier that day.

I woke with a start sometime later to the sound of Aech’s ringtone. He was
calling to let me know he’d arrived outside. I climbed out of the rig, collected
my things, and returned the rented gear at the front desk. When I stepped out
into the street, I saw that night had fallen. The frozen air hit me like a bucket of
ice water.
Aech’s tiny RV was just a few yards away, parked at the curb. It was a mochacolored SunRider, about twenty feet long, and at least two decades old. A
patchwork of solar cells covered the RV’s roof and most of its body, along with a
liberal amount of rust. The windows were tinted black, so I couldn’t see inside.
I took a deep breath and crossed the slush-covered sidewalk, feeling a strange
combination of dread and excitement. As I approached the RV, a door near the
center of the right side slid open and a short stepladder extended to the
pavement. I climbed inside and the door slid shut behind me. I found myself in
the RV’s tiny kitchen. It was dark except for the running lights set into the
carpeted floor. To my left, I saw a small bedroom area at the back, wedged into a
loft above the RV’s battery compartment. I turned and walked slowly across the
darkened kitchen, then pulled back the beaded curtain covering the doorway to
the cab.
A heavyset African American girl sat in the RV’s driver seat, clutching the
wheel tightly and staring straight ahead. She was about my age, with short, kinky
hair and chocolate-colored skin that appeared iridescent in the soft glow of the
dashboard indicators. She was wearing a vintage Rush 2112 concert T-shirt, and
the numbers were warped around her large bosom. She also had on faded black
jeans and a pair of studded combat boots. She appeared to be shivering, even
though it was nice and warm in the cab.
I stood there for a moment, staring at her in silence, waiting for her to
acknowledge my presence. Eventually, she turned and smiled at me, and it was a
smile I recognized immediately. That Cheshire grin I’d seen thousands of times
before, on the face of Aech’s avatar, during the countless nights we’d spent
together in the OASIS, telling bad jokes and watching bad movies. And her
smile wasn’t the only thing I found familiar. I also recognized the set of her eyes
and the lines of her face. There was no doubt in my mind. The young woman
sitting in front of me was my best friend, Aech.
A wave of emotion washed over me. Shock gave way to a sense of betrayal.

How could he—she—deceive me all these years? I felt my face flush with
embarrassment as I remembered all of the adolescent intimacies I’d shared with
Aech. A person I’d trusted implicitly. Someone I thought I knew.
When I didn’t say anything, her eyes dropped to her boots and stayed on them.
I sat down heavily in the passenger seat, still staring over at her, still unsure of
what to say. She kept stealing glances at me; then her eyes would dart away
nervously. She was still trembling.
Whatever anger or betrayal I felt quickly evaporated.
I couldn’t help myself. I started to laugh. There was no meanness in it, and I
knew she could tell that, because her shoulders relaxed a bit and she let out a
relieved sigh. Then she started to laugh too. Half laughing and half crying, I
thought.
“Hey, Aech,” I said, once our laughter subsided. “How goes it?”
“It’s going good, Z,” she said. “All sunshine and rainbows.” Her voice was
familiar too. Just not quite as deep as it was online. All this time, she’d been
using software to disguise it.
“Well,” I said. “Look at us. Here we are.”
“Yeah,” Aech replied. “Here we are.”
An uncomfortable silence descended. I hesitated a moment, unsure of what to
do. Then I followed my instincts, crossed the small space between us, and put
my arms around her. “It’s good to see you, old friend,” I said. “Thanks for
coming to get me.”
She returned the hug. “It’s good to see you too,” she said. And I could tell she
meant it.
I let go of her and stepped back. “Christ, Aech,” I said, smiling. “I knew you
were hiding something. But I never imagined …”
“What?” she said, a bit defensively. “You never imagined what?”
“That the famous Aech, renowned gunter and the most feared and ruthless
arena combatant in the entire OASIS, was, in reality, a …”
“A fat black chick?”
“I was going to say ‘young African American woman.’ ”
Her expression darkened. “There’s a reason I never told you, you know.”
“And I’m sure it’s a good one,” I said. “But it really doesn’t matter.”
“It doesn’t?”
“Of course not. You’re my best friend, Aech. My only friend, to be honest.”
“Well, I still want to explain.”
“OK. But can it wait until we’re in the air?” I said. “We’ve got a long way to
travel. And I’ll feel a lot safer once we’ve left this city in the dust.”
“We’re on our way, amigo,” she said, putting the RV in gear.

Aech followed Og’s directions to a private hangar near the Columbus airport,
where a small luxury jet was waiting for us. Og had arranged for Aech’s RV to
be stored in a nearby hangar, but it had been her home for many years, and I
could tell she was nervous about leaving it behind.
We both stared at the jet in wonder as we approached it. I’d seen airplanes in
the sky before, of course, but I’d never seen one up close. Traveling by jet was
something only rich people could afford. That Og could afford to charter three
different jets to retrieve us without batting an eyelash was a testament to just
how insanely wealthy he must be.
The jet was completely automated, so there was no crew on board. We were
all alone. The placid voice of the autopilot welcomed us aboard, then told us to
strap in and prepare for takeoff. We were up in the air within minutes.
It was the first time either of us had ever flown, and we both spent the first
hour of the flight staring out the windows, overwhelmed by the view, as we
hurtled westward through the atmosphere at ten thousand feet, on our way to
Oregon. Finally, once some of the novelty had worn off, I could tell that Aech
was ready to talk.
“OK, Aech,” I said. “Tell me your story.”
She flashed her Cheshire grin and took a deep breath. “The whole thing was
originally my mother’s idea,” she said. Then she launched into an abbreviated
version of her life story. Her real name, she said, was Helen Harris, and she was
only a few months older than I was. She’d grown up in Atlanta, raised by a
single mother. Her father had died in Afghanistan when she was still a baby. Her
mother, Marie, worked from home, in an online data-processing center. In
Marie’s opinion, the OASIS was the best thing that had ever happened to both
women and people of color. From the very start, Marie had used a white male
avatar to conduct all of her online business, because of the marked difference it
made in how she was treated and the opportunities she was given.
When Aech first logged into the OASIS, she followed her mother’s advice and
created a Caucasian male avatar. “H” had been her mother’s nickname for her
since she was a baby, so she’d decided to use it as the name of her online
persona. A few years later, when she started attending school online, her mother
lied about her daughter’s race and gender on the application. Aech was required
to provide a photo for her school profile, so she’d submitted a photorealistic
rendering of her male avatar’s face, which she’d modeled after her own features.
Aech told me that she hadn’t seen or spoken to her mother since leaving home
on her eighteenth birthday. That was the day Aech had finally come out to her

mother about her sexuality. At first, her mother refused to believe she was gay.
But then Helen revealed that she’d been dating a girl she met online for nearly a
year.
As Aech explained all of this, I could tell she was studying my reaction. I
wasn’t all that surprised, really. Over the past few years, Aech and I had
discussed our mutual admiration for the female form on numerous occasions. I
was actually relieved to know that Aech hadn’t been deceiving me, at least not
on that account.
“How did your mother react when she found out you had a girlfriend?” I
asked.
“Well, it turns out that my mother had her own set of deep-seated prejudices,”
Aech said. “She kicked me out of the house and said she never wanted to see me
again. I was homeless for a little while. I lived in a series of shelters. But
eventually I earned enough competing in the OASIS arena leagues to buy my
RV, and I’ve been living in it ever since. I usually only stop moving when the
RV’s batteries need to recharge.”
As we continued to talk, going through the motions of getting to know each
other, I realized that we already did know each other, as well as any two people
could. We’d known each other for years, in the most intimate way possible.
We’d connected on a purely mental level. I understood her, trusted her, and loved
her as a dear friend. None of that had changed, or could be changed by anything
as inconsequential as her gender, or skin color, or sexual orientation.
The rest of the flight seemed to go by in a blink. Aech and I quickly fell into
our old familiar rhythm, and before long it was like we were back in the
Basement, trash-talking each other over a game of Quake or Joust. Any fears I
had about the resiliency of our friendship in the real world had vanished by the
time our jet touched down on Og’s private runway in Oregon.
We’d been flying west across the country, just a few hours ahead of the
sunrise, so it was still dark when we landed. Aech and I both froze in our tracks
as we stepped off the plane, gazing in wonder at the scene around us. Even in the
dim moonlight, the view was breathtaking. The dark, towering silhouettes of the
Wallowa Mountains surrounded us on all sides. Rows of blue runway lights
stretched out along the valley floor behind us, delineating Og’s private landing
strip. Directly ahead, a steep cobblestone staircase at the edge of the runway led
up to a grand, floodlit mansion constructed on a plateau near the base of the
mountain range. Several waterfalls were visible in the distance, spilling off the
peaks beyond Morrow’s mansion.
“It looks just like Rivendell,” Aech said, taking the words right out of my
mouth.

I nodded. “It looks exactly like Rivendell in the Lord of the Rings movies,” I
said, still staring up at it in awe. “Og’s wife was a big Tolkien fan, remember?
He built this place for her.”
We heard an electric hum behind us as the jet’s staircase retracted and the
hatch closed. The engines powered back up and the jet rotated, preparing to take
off again. We stood and watched it launch back up into the clear, starry sky. Then
we turned and began to mount the staircase leading up to the house. When we
finally reached the top, Ogden Morrow was there waiting for us.
“Welcome, my friends!” Og bellowed, extending both his hands in greeting.
He was dressed in a plaid bathrobe and bunny slippers. “Welcome to my home!”
“Thank you, sir,” Aech said. “Thanks for inviting us here.”
“Ah, you must be Aech,” he replied, clasping her hand. If he was surprised by
her appearance, he didn’t show it. “I recognize your voice.” He gave her a wink,
followed by a bear hug. Then he turned and hugged me, too. “And you must be
Wade—I mean, Parzival! Welcome! Welcome! It’s truly an honor to meet you
both!”
“The honor is ours,” I said. “We really can’t thank you enough for helping
us.”
“You’ve already thanked me enough, so stop it!” he said. He turned and led us
across an expansive green lawn, toward his enormous house. “I can’t tell you
how good it is to have visitors. Sad to say, I’ve been all alone here since Kira
died.” He was silent a moment; then he laughed. “Alone except for my cooks,
maids, and gardeners, of course. But they all live here too, so they don’t really
count as visitors.”
Neither I nor Aech knew how to reply, so we just kept smiling and nodding.
Eventually, I worked up the courage to speak. “Have the others arrived yet?
Shoto and Art3mis?”
Something about the way I said “Art3mis” made Morrow chuckle, long and
loud. After a few seconds, I realized Aech was laughing at me too.
“What?” I said. “What’s so funny?”
“Yes,” Og said, grinning. “Art3mis arrived first, several hours ago, and
Shoto’s plane got here about thirty minutes before you arrived.”
“Are we going to meet them now?” I asked, doing an extremely poor job of
hiding my apprehension.
Og shook his head. “Art3mis felt that meeting you two right now would be an
unnecessary distraction. She wanted to wait until after the ‘big event.’ And Shoto
seemed to agree.” He studied me for a moment. “It probably is for the best, you
know. You’ve all got a big day ahead of you.”
I nodded, feeling a strange combination of relief and disappointment.

“Where are they now?” Aech asked.
Og raised a fist triumphantly in the air. “They’re already logged in, preparing
for your assault on the Sixers!” His voice echoed across the grounds and off the
high stone walls of his mansion. “Follow me! The hour draws near!”
Og’s enthusiasm pulled me back into the moment, and I felt a nervous knot
form in the pit of my stomach. We followed our bathrobed benefactor across the
expansive moonlit courtyard. As we approached the main house, we passed a
small gated-in garden filled with flowers. The garden was in a strange location,
and I couldn’t figure out its purpose until I saw the large tombstone at its center.
Then I realized it must be Kira Morrow’s grave. But even in the bright
moonlight, it was still too dark for me to make out the inscription on the
headstone.
Og led us through the mansion’s lavish front entrance. The lights were off
inside, but instead of turning them on, Morrow took an honest-to-God torch off
the wall and used it to illuminate our way. Even in dim torchlight, the grandeur
of the place amazed me. Giant tapestries and a huge collection of fantasy
artwork covered the walls, while gargoyle statues and suits of armor lined the
hallways.
As we followed Og, I worked up enough courage to speak to him. “Listen, I
know this probably isn’t the time,” I said. “But I’m a huge fan of your work. I
grew up playing Halcydonia Interactive’s educational games. They taught me
how to read, write, do math, solve puzzles …” I proceeded to ramble on as we
walked, raving about all of my favorite Halcydonia titles and geeking out on Og
in a classically embarrassing fashion.
Aech must have thought I was brown-nosing, because she snickered
throughout my stammering monologue, but Og was very cool about it. “That’s
wonderful to hear,” he said, seeming genuinely pleased. “My wife and I were
very proud of those games. I’m so glad you have fond memories of them.”
We rounded a corner, and Aech and I both froze before the entrance of a giant
room filled with row after row of old videogames. We both knew it must be
James Halliday’s classic videogame collection—the collection he’d willed to
Morrow after his death. Og glanced around and saw us lingering by the entrance,
then hurried back to retrieve us.
“I promise to give you a tour later, when all the excitement is over,” Og said,
his breathing a bit labored. He was moving quickly for a man his age and size.
He led us down a spiral stone staircase to an elevator that carried us down
several more floors to Og’s basement. The decor here was much more modern.
We followed Og through a maze of carpeted hallways until we reached a row of
seven circular doorways, each numbered.

“And here we are!” Morrow said, gesturing with the torch. “These are my
OASIS immersion bays. They’re all top-of-the-line Habashaw rigs. OIR-Ninetyfour hundreds.”
“Ninety-four hundreds? No kidding?” Aech let out a low whistle. “Wicked.”
“Where are the others?” I asked, looking around nervously.
“Art3mis and Shoto are already in bays two and three,” he said. “Bay one is
mine. You two can take your pick of the others.”
I stared at the doors, wondering which one Art3mis was behind.
Og motioned to the end of the hall. “You’ll find haptic suits of all sizes in the
dressing rooms. Now, get yourselves suited and booted!”
He smiled wide when Aech and I emerged from the dressing rooms a few
minutes later, each dressed in brand-new haptic suits and gloves.
“Excellent!” Og said. “Now grab a bay and log in. The clock is ticking!”
Aech turned to face me. I could tell she wanted to say something, but words
seemed to fail her. After a few seconds she stuck out her gloved hand. I took it.
“Good luck, Aech,” I said.
“Good luck, Z,” she replied. Then she turned to Og and said, “Thanks again,
Og.” Before he could respond, she stood on her tiptoes and kissed him on the
cheek. Then she disappeared through the door to bay four and it hissed shut
behind her.
Og grinned after her, then turned to face me. “The whole world is rooting for
the four of you. Try not to let them down.”
“We’ll do our best.”
“I know you will.” He offered me his hand and I shook it.
I took a step toward my immersion bay, then turned back. “Og, can I ask you
one question?” I said.
He raised an eyebrow. “If you’re going to ask me what’s inside the Third
Gate, I have no idea,” he said. “And even if I did, I wouldn’t tell you. You
should know that.…”
I shook my head. “No, that’s not it. I wanted to ask what it was that ended
your friendship with Halliday. In all the research I’ve done, I’ve never been able
to find out. What happened?”
Morrow studied me for a moment. He’d been asked this question in interviews
many times before and had always ignored it. I don’t know why he decided to
tell me. Maybe he’d been waiting all these years to tell someone.
“It was because of Kira. My wife.” He paused a moment, then cleared his
throat and continued. “Like me, he’d been in love with her since high school. Of
course, he never had the courage to act on it. So she never knew how he felt
about her. And neither did I. He didn’t tell me about it until the last time I spoke

to him, right before he died. Even then, it was hard for him to communicate with
me. Jim was never very good with people, or with expressing his emotions.”
I nodded silently and waited for him to continue.
“Even after Kira and I got engaged, I think Jim still harbored some fantasy of
stealing her away from me. But once we got married, he abandoned that notion.
He told me he’d stopped speaking to me because of the overwhelming jealousy
he felt. Kira was the only woman he ever loved.” Morrow’s voice caught in his
throat. “I can understand why Jim felt that way. Kira was very special. It was
impossible not to fall in love with her.” He smiled at me. “You know what it’s
like to meet someone like that, don’t you?”
“I do,” I said. Then, when I realized he had no more to say on the subject, I
said, “Thank you, Mr. Morrow. Thank you for telling me all of that.”
“You’re quite welcome,” he said. Then he walked over to his immersion bay,
and the door irised open. Inside, I could see that his rig had been modified to
include several strange components, including an OASIS console modified to
look like a vintage Commodore 64. He glanced back at me. “Good luck,
Parzival. You’re going to need it.”
“What are you going to do?” I asked. “During the fight?”
“Sit back and watch, of course!” he said. “This looks to be the most epic battle
in videogame history.” He grinned at me one last time, then stepped through the
door and was gone, leaving me alone in the dimly lit hallway.
I spent a few minutes thinking about everything Morrow had told me. Then I
walked over to my own immersion bay and stepped inside.
It was a small spherical room. A gleaming haptic chair was suspended on a
jointed hydraulic arm attached to the ceiling. There was no omnidirectional
treadmill, because the room itself served that function. While you were logged
in, you could walk or run in any direction and the sphere would rotate around
and beneath you, preventing you from ever touching the wall. It was like being
inside a giant hamster ball.
I climbed into the chair and felt it adjust to fit the contours of my body. A
robotic arm extended from the chair and slipped a brand-new Oculance visor
onto my face. It, too, adjusted so that it fit perfectly. The visor scanned my
retinas and the system prompted me to speak my new pass phrase: “Reindeer
Flotilla Setec Astronomy.”
I took a deep breath as the system logged me in.

I was ready to rock.
My avatar was buffed to the eyeballs and armed to the teeth. I was packing as
many magic items and as much firepower as I could squeeze into my inventory.
Everything was in place. Our plan was in motion. It was time to go.
I entered my stronghold’s hangar and pressed a button on the wall to open the
launch doors. They slid back, slowly revealing the launch tunnel leading up to
Falco’s surface. I walked to the end of the runway, past my X-wing and the
Vonnegut. I wouldn’t be taking either of them today. They were both good ships,
with formidable weapons and defenses, but neither craft would offer much
protection in the epic shitstorm that was about to unfold on Chthonia.
Fortunately, I now had a new mode of transportation.
I removed the twelve-inch Leopardon robot from my avatar’s inventory and
set it down gently on the runway. Shortly before I’d been arrested by IOI, I’d
taken some time to examine the toy Leopardon robot and ascertain its powers.
As I suspected, the robot was actually a powerful magical item. It hadn’t taken
me long to figure out the command word required to activate it. Just like in
Toei’s original Supaidaman TV series, you summoned the robot simply by
shouting its name. I did this now, taking the precaution of backing away from the
robot a good distance before shouting “Leopardon!”
I heard a piercing shriek that sounded like rending metal. A second later, the
once-tiny robot had grown to a height of almost a hundred meters. The top of the
robot’s head now protruded through the open launch doors in the hangar ceiling.
I gazed up at the towering robot, admiring the attention to detail Halliday had
put into coding it. Every feature of the original Japanese mech had been recreated, including its giant gleaming sword and spiderweb-embossed shield. A
tiny access door was set into the robot’s massive left foot, and it opened as I
approached, revealing a small elevator inside. It carried me up through the
interior of the robot’s leg and torso, to the cockpit located inside its armored
chest. As I seated myself in the captain’s chair, I spotted a silver control bracelet

in a clear case on the wall. I took it out and snapped it onto my avatar’s wrist.
The bracelet would allow me to use voice commands to control the robot while I
was outside it.
Several rows of buttons were set into the command console in front of me, all
labeled in Japanese. I pressed one of them and the engines roared to life. Then I
hit the throttle and the twin rocket boosters in each of the robot’s feet ignited,
launching it upward, out of my stronghold and into Falco’s star-filled sky.
I noticed that Halliday had added an old eight-track tape player to the cockpit
control panel. There was also a rack of eight-track tapes mounted over my right
shoulder. I grabbed one and slapped it into the deck. Dirty Deeds Done Dirt
Cheap by AC/DC began to blast out of the robot’s internal and external speakers,
so loud it made my chair vibrate.
As soon as the robot was clear of my hangar, I shouted “Change Marveller!”
into the control bracelet (the voice commands appeared to work only if you
shouted them). The robot’s legs, arms, and head folded inward and locked into
new positions, transforming the robot into a starship known as the Marveller.
Once the transformation was complete, I left Falco’s orbit and set a course for
the nearest stargate.
When I emerged from the stargate in Sector Ten, my radar screen lit up like a
Christmas tree. Thousands of space vehicles of every make and model were
crawling through the starry blackness around me, everything from single-seater
craft to giant moon-sized freighters. I’d never seen so many starships in one
place. A steady stream of them poured out of the stargate, while others
converged on the area from every direction in the sky. All of the ships gradually
funneled together, forming a long, haphazard caravan of vessels stretching
toward Chthonia, a tiny blue-brown orb floating in the distance. It looked like
every single person in the OASIS was headed for Castle Anorak. I felt a brief
surge of exhilaration, even though I knew Art3mis’s warning might still prove
true—there was a chance most of these avatars were here only to watch the show
and had no intention of actually risking their lives to fight the Sixers.
Art3mis. After all this time, she was now in a room just a few feet away from
me. We would actually be meeting in person as soon as this fight was over. The
thought should have terrified me, but instead I felt a zen calm wash over me:
Whatever was going to happen down on Chthonia, everything I’d risked had
already been worth it.
I transformed the Marveller back into its robot configuration, then joined the
long parade of spacecraft. My ship stood out in the vast array of vessels, since it
was the only giant robot. A cloud of smaller ships quickly formed around me,
piloted by curious avatars zooming in for a closer look at Leopardon. I had to

mute my comlink because so many different people were trying to hail me,
asking who the hell I was and where I’d picked up such a sweet ride.
As the planet Chthonia grew larger in my cockpit window, the density and
number of ships around me seemed to increase exponentially. When I finally
entered the planet’s atmosphere and began to descend toward the surface, it was
like flying through a swarm of metal insects. When I reached the area around
Castle Anorak, I had a hard time believing my eyes. A concentrated, pulsing
mass of ships and avatars covered the ground and filled the air. It was like some
otherworldly Woodstock. Shoulder-to-shoulder avatars stretched to the horizon
in all directions. Thousands more floated and flew through the air above,
dodging the constant influx of ships. And at the center of all this insanity stood
Castle Anorak itself, an onyx jewel gleaming beneath the Sixers’ transparent
spherical shield. Every few seconds some hapless avatar or ship would
inadvertently fly or careen into the shield and get vaporized, like a fly hitting a
bug zapper.
When I got closer, I spotted an open patch of ground directly in front of the
castle’s entrance, just outside the shield wall. Three giant figures stood side by
side at the center of the clearing. The crowd around them was continuously
surging inward and then receding as avatars pushed back against each other to
try to keep a respectful distance from Aech, Art3mis, and Shoto, who each sat
inside their own gleaming giant robot.
This was my first opportunity to see which robots Aech, Art3mis, and Shoto
had selected after clearing the Second Gate, and it took me a moment to place
the towering female robot Art3mis was piloting. It was black and chrome in
color, with elaborate boomerang-shaped headgear and symmetrical red
breastplates that made it look like a female version of Tranzor Z. Then I realized
it was the female version of Tranzor Z, an obscure character from the original
Mazinger Z anime series known as Minerva X.
Aech had selected an RX-78 Gundam mech from the original Mobile Suit
Gundam anime series, one of his longtime favorites. (Even though I now knew
Aech was actually a female in real life, her avatar was still male, so I decided to
continue to refer to him as such.)
Shoto stood several heads taller than both of them, concealed inside the
cockpit of Raideen, the enormous red-and-blue robot from the mid-’70s Brave
Raideen anime series. The massive mech clutched his signature golden bow in
one hand and had a large spiked shield strapped to the other.
A roar swept through the crowd as I flew in low over the shield and rocketed
to a halt above the others. I rotated my orientation so that Leopardon was
upright, then cut the engines and dropped the remaining distance to the surface.

My robot landed on one knee, and the impact shook the ground. As I stood it
upright, the sea of onlookers began to chant my avatar’s name. Par-zi-val! Parzi-val!
As the chanting faded back to a dull roar, I turned to face my companions.
“Nice entrance, ya big show-off,” Art3mis said, using our private comlink
channel. “Did you show up late on purpose?”
“Not my fault, I swear,” I said, trying to play it cool. “There was a long line at
the stargate.”
Aech nodded his mech’s massive head. “Every transport terminal on the
planet has been spitting out avatars since last night,” he said, motioning to the
scene around us with his Gundam’s massive hand. “This is unreal. I’ve never
seen so many ships or avatars in one place.”
“Me neither,” Art3mis said. “I’m surprised the GSS servers can handle the
load, with so much activity in one sector. But there doesn’t seem to be any lag at
all.”
I took a long look at the sea of avatars around us, then shifted my attention to
the castle. Thousands of flying avatars and ships continued to buzz around the
shield, occasionally firing bullets, lasers, missiles, and other projectiles at it, all
of which impacted harmlessly on the surface. Inside the sphere, thousands of
power-armored Sixer avatars stood in silent formation, completely encircling the
castle. Interspersed through their ranks were rows of hover tanks and gunships.
In any other setting, the Sixer army would have appeared formidable. Maybe
even unstoppable. But in the face of the endless mob that now surrounded them,
the Sixers looked woefully outnumbered and outmatched.
“So, Parzival,” said Shoto, turning his robot’s huge head in my direction. “It’s
showtime, old friend. If that sphere doesn’t come down like you promised, this is
going to be pretty embarrassing.”
“ ‘Han will have that shield down,’ ” Aech quoted. “ ‘We’ve got to give him
more time!’ ”
I laughed, then used my robot’s right hand to tap the back of its left wrist,
indicating the time. “Aech is right. It’s still six minutes to noon.”
The end of my sentence was drowned out by another roar from the crowd.
Directly in front of us, inside the sphere, the massive front doors of Castle
Anorak had just swung open, and now a single Sixer avatar was emerging from
within.
Sorrento.
Grinning at the din of booing and hissing that greeted his arrival, Sorrento
waved his hand at the Sixer troops stationed directly in front of the castle and
they immediately scattered, clearing a large open space. Sorrento stepped

forward into it, positioning himself directly opposite us, just a few dozen yards
away, on the other side of the shield. Ten other Sixer avatars emerged from the
castle and positioned themselves behind Sorrento, each of them standing a good
distance apart.
“I have a bad feeling about this,” Art3mis muttered into her headset.
“Yeah,” Aech whispered. “Me too.”
Sorrento surveyed the scene, then smiled up at us. When he spoke, his voice
was amplified through powerful speakers mounted on the Sixer gunships and
hover tanks, allowing him to be heard by everyone in the area. And since there
were cameras and reporters from every major newsfeed outlet present, I knew
his words were being broadcast to the entire world.
“Welcome to Castle Anorak,” Sorrento said. “We’ve been expecting you.” He
made a sweeping gesture, indicating the angry mob that surrounded him. “I must
say, we are a bit surprised so many of you showed up here today. By now it must
be obvious, to even the most ignorant among you, that nothing can get past our
shield.”
His proclamation was met with a deafening roar of shouted threats, insults,
and colorful profanity. I waited a moment, then raised both of my robot’s hands,
calling for quiet. Once a semblance of silence had descended, I got on the public
comm channel, which had the same effect as turning on a giant PA system. I
dialed my headset volume down to kill the feedback, then said, “You’re wrong,
Sorrento. We’re coming in. At noon. All of us.”
A roar of approval erupted from the assembled gunters. Sorrento didn’t bother
waiting for it to die down. “You’re welcome to try,” he said, still grinning. Then
he produced an item from his inventory and placed it on the ground in front of
him. I zoomed in for a closer look and felt the muscles in my jaw tighten. It was
a toy robot. A bipedal dinosaur with armor-plated skin and a pair of large
cannons mounted on its shoulder blades. I recognized it immediately, from
several turn-of-the-century Japanese monster flicks.
It was Mechagodzilla.
“Kiryu!” Sorrento shouted, his voice still amplified. At the sound of the
command word, his tiny robot instantly grew in size until it stood almost as tall
as Castle Anorak itself, twice the height of the “giant” robots that Aech, Shoto,
Art3mis, and I piloted. The mechanical lizard’s armored head almost touched the
top of the spherical shield.
An awestruck silence fell over the crowd, followed by a rumble of fearful
recognition from the thousands of gunters present. They all recognized this giant
metal behemoth. And they all knew it was nearly indestructible.
Sorrento entered the mech through an access door in one of its massive heels.

A few seconds later, the beast’s eyes began to glow bright yellow. Then it threw
back its head, opened its jagged maw, and let out a piercing metallic roar.
On cue, the ten Sixer avatars standing behind Sorrento pulled out their toy
robots and activated them, too. Five of them had the huge robotic lions that
could form Voltron. The other five had giant mechs from Robotech and Neon
Genesis Evangelion.
“Oh shit,” I heard Art3mis and Aech whisper in unison.
“Come on!” Sorrento shouted defiantly. His challenge echoed across the
crowded landscape.
Many of the gunters on the front lines took an involuntary step backward. A
few others turned and ran for their lives. But Aech, Shoto, Art3mis, and I held
our ground.
I checked the time on my display. Less than a minute to go now. I pressed a
button on Leopardon’s control panel, and my giant robot drew its gleaming
sword.

I didn’t witness it firsthand, but I can tell you with some certainty that this is
what happened next:
The Sixers had erected a large armored bunker behind Castle Anorak, filled
with pallets of weapons and battle gear that had been teleported in by the Sixers
before they activated their shield. There was also a long rack of thirty Supply
Droids, which had been installed along the bunker’s eastern wall. Due to a lack
of imagination on the part of the Supply Droids’ original designer, they all
looked exactly like the robot Johnny Five from the 1986 film Short Circuit. The
Sixers used these droids primarily as gofers, to run errands and fill equipment
and ammo requisitions for the troops stationed outside.
At exactly one minute to noon, one of the Supply Droids, designation SD-03,
powered itself on and disengaged from its charging dock. Then it rolled forward
on its tank treads, across the bunker floor, to the armory cage at its opposite end.
Two robotic sentries stood outside the armory’s entrance. SD-03 transmitted its
equipment requisition order to them—an order that I myself had submitted on
the Sixer intranet two days earlier. The sentries verified the requisition and
stepped aside, permitting SD-03 to roll into the cage. It continued past long
storage racks that held a wide array of weaponry: magic swords, shields,
powered armor suits, plasma rifles, railguns, and countless other weapons.
Finally, the droid rolled to a stop. The rack in front of it held five large
octahedron-shaped devices, each roughly the size of a soccer ball. Each device
had a small control panel set into one of its eight sides, along with a serial

number. SD-03 found the serial number that matched the one on my requisition
form. Then, following a set of instructions I’d programmed into it, the little droid
used its clawlike index finger to enter a series of commands on the device’s
control panel. When it finished, a small light above the keypad turned from
green to red. Then SD-03 lifted the octahedron in its arms. As it exited the
armory, one antimatter friction-induction bomb was subtracted from the Sixers’
computerized inventory.
SD-03 then rolled out of the bunker and began to climb a series of ramps and
staircases the Sixers had built onto the castle’s outer walls to provide access to
the upper levels. Along the way, the droid rolled through several security
checkpoints. Each time, robotic sentries scanned its security clearance and found
that the droid was allowed to go anywhere it damn well pleased. When SD-03
reached Castle Anorak’s uppermost level, it rolled out onto a large observation
platform located there.
At this point, SD-03 may have drawn a few curious looks from the squadron
of elite Sixer avatars guarding the platform. I have no way of knowing. But even
if the guards somehow anticipated what was about to happen and opened fire on
the little droid, it was too late for them to stop it now.
SD-03 continued rolling directly to the center of the roof, where a high-level
Sixer wizard sat holding the Orb of Osuvox—the artifact generating the
spherical shield around the castle.
Then, executing the last of the instructions I’d programmed into it two days
earlier, SD-03 lifted the antimatter friction-induction bomb up over its head and
detonated it.
The explosion vaporized the supply droid, along with all the avatars stationed
on the platform, including the Sixer wizard who was operating the Orb of
Osuvox. The moment he died, the artifact deactivated and fell to the now-empty
platform.

A brilliant flash of light accompanied the detonation, momentarily blinding
me. When it receded, my eyes focused back on the castle. The shield was down.
Now, nothing separated the mighty Sixer and gunter armies but open ground and
empty space.
For about five seconds, nothing happened. Time seemed to stop and
everything was silent and still. Then all hell broke loose.
Sitting alone in the cockpit of my mech, I let out a silent cheer. Incredibly, my
plan had worked. But I had no time to celebrate, because I was now standing
smack-dab in the middle of the largest battle in the history of the OASIS.
I don’t know what I expected to happen next. I’d hoped maybe a tenth of the
gunters present would join our assault on the Sixers. But in seconds it was clear
that every single one of them intended to join the fight. A fierce battle cry rose
from the sea of avatars around us and they all surged forward, converging on the
Sixer army from every direction. Their total lack of hesitation astounded me,
because it was obvious many of them were rushing toward certain death.
I watched in amazement as the two mighty forces clashed all around me, on
the ground and in the sky. It was a chaotic, breathtaking scene, like several
beehives and wasp nests had been smashed together and then dropped onto a
giant anthill.
Art3mis, Aech, Shoto, and I stood at the center of it all. At first, I didn’t even
move for fear of crushing the wave of gunters swarming around and over my
robot’s feet. Sorrento, however, didn’t wait for anyone to get out of his way. He
crushed several dozen avatars (including a few of his own troops) under his
mech’s titanic feet as he lumbered toward us, each of his footfalls creating a
small crater in the rocky surface.
“Uh-oh,” I heard Shoto mutter as his mech assumed a defensive posture.
“Here he comes.”
The Sixer mechs were already taking an immense amount of fire from all
directions. Sorrento was getting hit more than anyone, because his mech was the

biggest target on the battlefield, and no gunter with a ranged weapon could seem
to resist taking a shot at him. The intense barrage of projectiles, fireballs, magic
missiles, and laser bolts quickly destroyed or disabled the other Sixer mechs
(who never even got a chance to form Voltron). But Sorrento’s robot somehow
remained undamaged. Every projectile that hit him seemed to ricochet
harmlessly off his mech’s armored body. Dozens of spacecraft swooped and
buzzed around him, peppering his mech with rocket fire, but their attacks also
seemed to have little effect.
“It is on!” Aech shouted into his comlink. “It is on like Red Dawn!” And with
that, he unleashed all of his Gundam’s considerable firepower at Sorrento. At the
same moment, Shoto began firing Raideen’s bow, while Art3mis’s mech fired
some sort of red energy beam that appeared to originate from Minerva X’s giant
metal breasts. Not wanting to be left out, I fired Leopardon’s Arc Turn weapon, a
gold boomerang that launched from the mech’s forehead.
All of our attacks were direct hits, but Art3mis’s beam weapon was the only
one that seemed to do any real damage to Sorrento. She blasted a chunk out of
the metal lizard’s right shoulder blade and disabled the cannon mounted there.
But Sorrento didn’t pause in his approach. As he continued to close in on us, the
Mechagodzilla’s eyes began to glow a bright blue. Then Sorrento opened its
mouth, and a cascading bolt of blue lightning shot outward from the mech’s open
maw. The beam struck the ground directly in front of us, then cut a deep
smoking furrow in the earth as it continued to sweep forward, vaporizing every
avatar and ship in its path. All four of us managed to leap out of the way by
launching our robots skyward, though I nearly took a direct hit. The lightning
weapon shut down a second later, but Sorrento continued to trudge forward. I
noticed that his mech’s eyes were no longer glowing blue. Apparently, his
lightning weapon had to recharge.
“I think we’ve reached the final boss,” Aech joked over the comlink. The four
of us were now spread out and circling above Sorrento, making ourselves
moving targets.
“Screw this, guys,” I said. “I don’t think we can destroy that thing.”
“Astute observation, Z,” Art3mis said. “Got any bright ideas?”
I thought for a second. “How about I distract him while the three of you cut
around and head for the castle entrance?”
“Sounds like a plan,” Shoto replied. But instead of heading for the castle, he
banked and flew straight at Sorrento, closing the distance between them in the
space of a few seconds.
“Go!” he shouted into his comlink. “This bastard is all mine!”
Aech cut across Sorrento’s right flank and Art3mis banked left, while I

rocketed upward and over him. Below me, I could see Shoto facing off against
Sorrento, and the difference in the size of their mechs was disturbing. Shoto’s
robot looked like an action figure next to Sorrento’s massive metal dragon.
Nevertheless, Shoto cut his thrusters and dropped to the ground directly in front
of the Mechagodzilla.
“Hurry,” I heard Aech shout. “The castle entrance is wide open!”
From my vantage point in the sky above, I could see that the Sixer forces
surrounding the castle were already being overrun by the endless mob of enemy
avatars. The Sixers’ lines were broken, and hundreds of gunters were streaming
past them now, running up to the open castle entrance only to discover once they
reached it that they couldn’t cross the threshold because they didn’t possess a
copy of the Crystal Key.
Aech swung around directly in front of me. Still a hundred feet off the ground,
he popped the hatch of his Gundam’s cockpit and leapt out, whispering the
robot’s command word in the same instant. As the giant robot shrank back to its
original size, he snatched it out of the air and stowed it in his inventory. Now
flying by some magical means, Aech’s avatar swooped down, passed over the
bottleneck of gunters clustered at the castle entrance, and disappeared through
the open double doors. A second later, Art3mis executed a similar maneuver,
stowing her own mech in midair and then flying into the castle right behind
Aech.
I dropped Leopardon into a sharp dive and prepared to follow them.
“Shoto,” I shouted into my comm. “We’re going inside now! Let’s go!”
“Go ahead,” Shoto replied. “I’ll be right behind you.” But something about
the tone of his voice bothered me, and I pulled out of my dive and swung my
mech back around. Shoto was hovering above Sorrento, near his right flank.
Sorrento slowly turned his mech around and began to stomp back toward the
castle. I could see now that his mech’s weakness was its lack of speed. The
Mechagodzilla’s slow movement and attacks counterbalanced its seeming
invulnerability.
“Shoto!” I shouted. “What are you waiting for? Let’s go!”
“Go on without me,” Shoto said. “I owe this son of a bitch some payback.”
Before I could reply, Shoto dove at Sorrento, swinging a giant sword in each
of his mech’s hands. The blades both cut into Sorrento’s right side, creating a
shower of sparks, and to my surprise, they actually did some damage. When the
smoke cleared I saw that the Mechagodzilla’s right arm now hung limp. It was
nearly severed at the elbow.
“Looks like you’ll be wiping with your left hand now, Sorrento!” Shoto
shouted triumphantly. Then he fired Raideen’s boosters and headed in my

direction, toward the castle. But Sorrento had already swiveled his mech’s head
around and was now taking a bead on Shoto with two glowing blue eyes.
“Shoto!” I shouted. “Look out!” But my voice was drowned out by the sound
of the lightning weapon firing out of the metal dragon’s mouth. It nailed Shoto’s
mech directly in the center of its back. The robot exploded in an orange ball of
fire.
I heard a brief screech of static on the comm channel. I called out Shoto’s
name again, but he didn’t reply. Then a message flashed on my display,
informing me that Shoto’s name had just disappeared from the Scoreboard.
He was dead.
This realization momentarily stunned me, which was unfortunate, because
Sorrento’s lightning weapon was still firing, moving in a fast sweeping arc,
cutting across the ground, then diagonally up the castle wall, toward me. I finally
reacted—too late—and Sorrento nailed my mech in the lower torso, just a split
second before the beam cut off.
I looked down to discover that the bottom half of my robot had just been
blasted away. Every warning indicator in my cockpit started to flash as my mech
began to fall out of the sky in two smoking, burning halves.
Somehow, I had the presence of mind to reach up and yank the ejection handle
above my seat. The cockpit canopy popped off, and I jumped free of the falling
mech a split second before it impacted on the castle steps, killing several dozen
of the avatars crowded there.
I fired my avatar’s jet boots just before I hit the ground, then quickly adjusted
my immersion rig’s control setup, because I was now controlling my avatar
instead of a giant robot. I managed to land on my feet in front of the castle, just
clear of Leopardon’s flaming wreckage. A second after I landed, a shadow
spilled over me, and I turned around to see Sorrento’s mech blotting out the sky.
He raised its massive left foot, preparing to crush me.
I took three running steps and jumped, firing my jet boots in midleap. The
thrust threw me clear just as the Mechagodzilla’s huge clawed foot slammed
down, forming a crater in the spot where I’d stood a second before. The metal
beast let out another earsplitting shriek, followed by hollow, booming laughter.
Sorrento’s laughter.
I cut my jet-boot thrusters and tucked my avatar into a ball. I hit the ground
rolling, tumbled forward, then came up on my feet. I squinted up at the metal
lizard’s head. Its eyes weren’t glowing again—not yet. I could fire my jet boots
again now and make it inside the castle before Sorrento could fire on me again.
He wouldn’t be able to follow me inside—not without getting out of his oversize
mech.

I could hear Art3mis and Aech shouting at me on my comlink. They were
already inside, standing in front of the gate, waiting for me.
All I had to do was fly into the castle and join them. The three of us could
open and enter the gate before Sorrento caught up with us. I was sure of it.
But I didn’t move. Instead, I took out the Beta Capsule and held the small
metal cylinder in the palm of my avatar’s hand.
Sorrento had tried to kill me. And in the process, he’d murdered my aunt,
along with several of my neighbors, including sweet old Mrs. Gilmore, who had
never hurt a soul. He’d also had Daito killed, and even though I’d never met
him, Daito had been my friend.
And now Sorrento had just killed Shoto’s avatar, robbing him of his chance to
enter the Third Gate. Sorrento didn’t deserve his power or his position. What he
deserved, I decided in that moment, was public humiliation and defeat. He
deserved to have his ass kicked while the whole world watched.
I held the Beta Capsule high over my head and pressed its activation button.
There was a blinding flash of light, and the sky turned crimson as my avatar
changed, growing and morphing into a gigantic red-and-silver-skinned humanoid
alien with glowing egg-shaped eyes, a strange finned head, and a glowing light
embedded in the center of my chest. For the next three minutes, I was Ultraman.
The Mechagodzilla stopped shrieking and thrashing. Its gaze had been pointed
down at the ground, where my avatar had stood a second earlier. Now its head
slowly tilted up, taking in the size of its new opponent, until our glowing eyes
finally met. I now stood face-to-face with Sorrento’s mech, matching its height
and size almost exactly.
Sorrento’s mech took several awkward steps backward. Its eyes began to glow
again.
I crouched slightly and struck an offensive pose, noticing that a timer now
appeared in the corner of my display, counting down from three minutes.
2:59. 2:58. 2:57.
Below the timer there was a menu listing Ultraman’s various energy attacks in
Japanese. I quickly selected SPECIUM RAY and then held my arms up in front of
me, one horizontal and the other vertical, forming a cross. A pulsing beam of
white energy shot out of my forearms, striking the Mechagodzilla in its chest and
knocking it backward. Thrown off balance, Sorrento lost control and tripped
over his own mammoth feet. His mech tumbled to the ground, landing on its
side.
A cheer went up from the thousands of avatars watching from the chaotic
battlefield around us.
I launched myself into the air and flew half a kilometer straight upward. Then

I dropped back down, feet first, aiming my heels directly at the Mechagodzilla’s
curved spine. When my feet hit, I heard something inside the metal beast snap
under my crushing weight. Smoke began to pour out of its mouth, and the blue
glow in its eyes quickly dissipated.
I executed a backflip and landed behind the supine mech in a crouch. Its
single functioning arm flailed wildly while its tail and legs thrashed about.
Sorrento appeared to be struggling with the controls in an effort to get the beast
back on its feet.
I selected YATSUAKI KOHRIN from my weapon menu: Ultra-Slice. A glowing
circular saw blade of electric-blue energy appeared in my right hand, spinning
fiercely. I hurled it at Sorrento, releasing it with a snap of my wrist, like a
Frisbee. It whirred through the air and struck the Mechagodzilla in its stomach.
The energy blade cut into its metal skin as if it were tofu, slicing the mech into
two halves. Just before the entire machine exploded, the head detached and
blasted away from the neck. Sorrento had ejected. But since the mech was lying
flat, the head shot out on a trajectory parallel to the ground. Sorrento quickly
adjusted for this, and the rockets sprouting from the head began to tilt it
skyward. Before it could get very far, I crossed my arms again and fired another
specium ray, nailing the retreating head like a clay pigeon. It disintegrated in an
immensely satisfying explosion.
The crowd went wild.
I checked the Scoreboard and confirmed that Sorrento’s employee number had
vanished. His avatar was dead. I couldn’t take too much satisfaction from this,
though, because I knew he was probably already kicking one of his underlings
out of a haptic chair so he could take control of a new avatar.
The counter on my display had only fifteen seconds remaining when I
deactivated the Beta Capsule. My avatar instantly shrank back to normal size,
and my appearance returned to normal. Then I spun around, powered on my jet
boots, and flew into the castle.
When I reached the opposite end of the huge foyer, I found Aech and Art3mis
standing in front of the crystal door, waiting for me. The smoking, bloodied
bodies of over a dozen recently slain Sixer avatars lay scattered on the stone
floor around them, slowly fading out of existence. Apparently, there had been a
brief and decisive skirmish and I’d just missed it.
“No fair,” I said, cutting my jet boots and dropping to the floor beside Aech.
“You could have saved at least one of them for me.”
Art3mis didn’t reply. She just gave me the finger.
“Congrats on wasting Sorrento,” Aech said. “It was an epic throwdown, for
sure. But you’re still a complete idiot. You know that, right?”

“Yeah.” I shrugged. “I know.”
“You’re such a selfish asshole!” Art3mis shouted. “What if you’d gotten
yourself killed too?”
“I didn’t, though. Did I?” I said, stepping around her to examine the crystal
door. “So chill out and let’s open this thing.”
I examined the keyhole in the center of the door, then looked at the words
printed directly above it, etched into the door’s faceted surface. Charity. Hope.
Faith.
I took out my copy of the Crystal Key and held it up. Aech and Art3mis
followed suit and held up their keys too.
Nothing happened.
We all exchanged concerned looks. Then an idea occurred to me, and I cleared
my throat. “ ‘Three is a magic number,’ ” I said, reciting the first line of the
Schoolhouse Rock! song. As soon as I spoke the words, the crystal door began to
glow, and two additional keyholes appeared, on either side of the first.
“That did it!” Aech whispered. “Holy shit. I can’t believe this. We’re really
here. Standing in front of the Third Gate.”
Art3mis nodded. “Finally.”
I inserted my key in the center keyhole. Aech inserted his into the keyhole on
the left, and Art3mis placed hers in the keyhole on the right.
“Clockwise?” Art3mis said. “On the count of three?”
Aech and I nodded. Art3mis counted to three, and we turned our keys in
unison. There was a brief flash of blue light, during which all of our keys and the
crystal door itself vanished. And then the Third Gate stood open in front of us, a
crystal doorway leading into a spinning whirlpool of stars.
“Wow,” I heard Art3mis whisper beside me. “Here we go.”
As the three of us stepped forward, preparing to enter the gate, I heard an
earsplitting boom. It sounded like the entire universe was cracking in half.
And then we all died.

When your avatar gets killed, your screen doesn’t fade to black right away.
Instead, your point of view automatically shifts to a third-person perspective,
treating you to a brief out-of-body replay of your avatar’s final fate.
A split second after we heard the thunderous boom, my perspective shifted,
and I found myself looking at our three avatars, standing there frozen in front of
the open gate. Then an incinerating white light filled the world, accompanied by
an earsplitting wall of sound. It was what I’d always pictured being fried in a
nuclear blast would be like.
For a brief moment, I saw our avatars’ skeletons suspended inside the
transparent outlines of our motionless bodies. Then my avatar’s hit-point counter
dropped to zero.
The blast wave arrived a second later, disintegrating everything in its path—
our avatars, the floor, the walls, the castle itself, and the thousands of avatars
gathered around it. Everything was turned to a fine, atomized dust that hung
suspended in the air for a second before slowly settling to earth.
The entire surface of the planet had been wiped clean. The area around Castle
Anorak, which had been crowded with warring avatars a split second before, was
now a desolate and barren wasteland. Everyone and everything had been
destroyed. Only the Third Gate remained, a crystal doorway floating in the air
above the crater where the castle had stood a moment before.
My initial shock quickly turned to dread as I realized what had just happened.
The Sixers had detonated the Cataclyst.
It was the only explanation. Only that incredibly powerful artifact could have
done this. Not only had it killed every avatar in the sector, it had even destroyed
Castle Anorak, a fortress that, until now, had proven itself to be indestructible.
I stared at the open gate, floating in the empty air, and waited for the
inevitable, final message to appear in the center of my display, the words I knew
every other avatar in the sector must be seeing at this very moment: GAME OVER.
But when words finally did appear on my display, it was another message

entirely: CONGRATULATIONS! YOU HAVE AN EXTRA LIFE!
Then, as I watched in amazement, my avatar reappeared, fading back into
existence in the exact same location where I’d died a few seconds earlier. I was
standing in front of the open gate again. But the gate was now floating in midair,
suspended several dozen meters above the planet’s surface, over the crater that
had been created by the destruction of the castle. As my avatar finished
materializing, I looked down and realized that the floor I’d been standing on
earlier was now gone. So were my jet boots, and everything else I’d been
carrying.
I seemed to hover in midair for a moment, like Wile E. Coyote in the old
Roadrunner cartoons. Then I plummeted straight down. I made a desperate grab
for the open gate in front of me, but it was well out of reach.
I hit the ground hard and lost a third of my hit points from the impact. Then I
slowly got to my feet and looked around. I was standing in a vast cube-shaped
crater—the space where the foundation and lower basement levels of Castle
Anorak had stood. It was completely barren and eerily silent. There was no
rubble from the destroyed castle, and no wreckage from the thousands of
spaceships and aircraft that had filled the sky a few moments ago. In fact, there
was no sign at all of the grand battle that had just been fought here. The
Cataclyst had vaporized everything.
I looked down at my avatar and saw that I was now wearing a black T-shirt
and blue jeans, the default outfit that appeared on every newly created avatar.
Then I pulled up my stats and item inventory. My avatar had the same level and
ability scores I’d had previously, but my inventory was completely empty except
for one item—the quarter I’d obtained after playing my perfect game of PacMan on Archaide. Once I’d placed the quarter in my inventory, I hadn’t been
able to remove it, so I’d never been able to have any divination or identification
spells cast on it. I’d had no way of ascertaining the quarter’s true purpose or
powers. During the tumultuous events of the past few months, I’d forgotten I
even had the damn thing.
But now I knew what the quarter was—a single-use artifact that gave my
avatar an extra life. Until that moment, I hadn’t even known such a thing was
possible. In the history of the OASIS, there was no record of any avatar ever
acquiring an extra life.
I selected the quarter in my inventory and tried again to remove it. This time, I
was able to take it out and hold it in the palm of my avatar’s hand. Now that the
artifact’s sole power had been used, it no longer possessed any magical
properties. Now it was just a quarter.
I looked straight up at the crystal gate floating twenty meters above me. It was

still sitting there, wide open. But I had no idea how I was going to get up there to
enter it. I had no jet boots, no ship, and no magic items or memorized spells.
Nothing that would allow me to fly or levitate. And there wasn’t a single
stepladder in sight.
There I was, standing a stone’s throw from the Third Gate, but unable to reach
it.
“Hey, Z?” I heard a voice say. “Can you hear me?”
It was Aech, but her voice was no longer altered to sound male. I could hear
her perfectly, as if she were talking to me via comlink. But that didn’t make
sense, because my avatar no longer had a comlink. And Aech’s avatar was dead.
“Where are you?” I asked the empty air.
“I’m dead, like everyone else,” Aech said. “Everyone but you.”
“Then how can I hear you?”
“Og patched all of us into your audio and video feeds,” she said. “So we can
see what you see and hear what you hear.”
“Oh,” I said.
“Is that all right with you, Parzival?” I heard Og ask. “If it isn’t, just say so.”
I thought about it for a moment. “No, it’s fine with me,” I said. “Shoto and
Art3mis are listening in too?”
“Yes,” Shoto said. “I’m here.”
“Yeah, we’re here, all right,” Art3mis said, and I could hear the barely
contained rage in her voice. “And we’re all dead as doornails. The question is,
why aren’t you dead too, Parzival?”
“Yeah, Z,” Aech said. “We are a bit curious about that. What happened?”
I took out the quarter and held it up in front of my eyes. “I was awarded this
quarter on Archaide a few months ago, for playing a perfect game of Pac-Man. It
was an artifact, but I never knew its purpose. Not until now. Turns out it gave me
an extra life.”
I heard only silence for a moment; then Aech began to laugh. “You lucky son
of a bitch!” she said. “The newsfeeds are reporting that every single avatar in the
sector was just killed. Over half the population of the OASIS.”
“Was it the Cataclyst?” I asked.
“It had to be,” Art3mis said. “The Sixers must have bought it when it went up
for auction a few years ago. And they’ve been sitting on it all this time, waiting
for the perfect moment to detonate it.”
“But they just killed off all of their own troops, too,” Shoto said. “Why would
they do that?”
“I think most of them were already dead,” Art3mis said.
“The Sixers had no choice,” I said. “It was the only way they could stop us.

We’d already opened the Third Gate and were about to step inside when they
detonated that thing—” I paused, realizing something. “How did they know
we’d opened it? Unless—”
“They were watching us,” Aech said. “The Sixers probably had remote
surveillance cameras hidden all around the gate.”
“So they saw us open it,” Art3mis said. “Which means they know how to
open it now too.”
“Who cares?” Shoto interjected. “Sorrento’s avatar is dead. And so are all of
the other Sixers.”
“Wrong,” Art3mis said. “Check the Scoreboard. There are still twenty Sixer
avatars listed there, below Parzival. And their scores indicate that every single
one of them has a copy of the Crystal Key.”
“Shit!” Aech and Shoto said in unison.
“The Sixers knew they might have to detonate the Cataclyst,” I said. “So they
must have taken the precaution of moving some of their avatars outside of Sector
Ten. They were probably waiting in a gunship just across the sector border,
where it was safe.”
“You’re right,” Aech said. “Which means there are twenty more Sixers headed
your way right now, Z. So you need to get your ass moving and get inside that
gate. This is probably going to be your only chance to clear it.” I heard her let
out a defeated sigh. “It’s over for us. So we’re all rooting for you now, amigo.
Good luck.”
“Thanks, Aech.”
“Gokouun o inorimasu,” Shoto said. “Do your best.”
“I will,” I said. Then I waited for Art3mis to give me her blessing too.
“Good luck, Parzival,” she said after a long pause. “Aech is right, you know.
You’re never going to get another shot at this. And neither will any other
gunter.” I heard her voice catch, as if she were choking back tears. Then she took
a deep breath and said, “Don’t screw this up.”
“I won’t,” I said. “No pressure, right?”
I glanced back up at the open gate, suspended in the air above me, so far out
of reach. Then I dropped my gaze and began to scan the area, desperately trying
to figure out how I was going to get up there. Something caught my eye—just a
few flickering pixels in the distance, near the opposite end of the crater. I ran
toward them.
“Uh, not to be a backseat driver or anything,” Aech said. “But where the hell
are you going?”
“All of my avatar’s items were destroyed by the Cataclyst,” I said. “So now I
have no way to fly up there and reach the gate.”

“You’ve got to be kidding me!” Aech sighed. “Man, the hits just keep on
coming!”
As I approached the object in the distance, it became gradually clearer. It was
the Beta Capsule, floating just a few centimeters above the ground, spinning
clockwise. The Cataclyst had destroyed everything in the sector that could be
destroyed, but artifacts were indestructible. Just like the gate.
“It’s the Beta Capsule!” Shoto shouted. “It must have been thrown over here
by the force of the blast. You can use it to become Ultraman and fly up to the
gate!”
I nodded, raised the capsule over my head, then pressed the button on the side
to activate it. But nothing happened. “Shit!” I muttered, realizing why. “It won’t
work. It can only be used once a day.” I stowed the Beta Capsule and started to
scan the ground around me. “There must be other artifacts scattered around
here,” I said. I began to run along the perimeter of the castle foundation, still
scanning the ground. “Were any of you guys carrying artifacts? One that would
give me the ability to fly? Or levitate? Or teleport?”
“No,” answered Shoto. “I didn’t have any artifacts.”
“My Sword of the Ba’Heer was an artifact,” Aech said. “But it won’t help you
reach the gate.”
“But my Chucks will,” Art3mis said.
“Your ‘Chucks’?” I repeated.
“My shoes. Black Chuck Taylor All Stars. They bestow their wearer with both
speed and flight.”
“Great! Perfect!” I said. “Now I just have to find them.” I continued to run
forward, eyes sweeping the ground. I found Aech’s sword a minute later and
added it to my inventory, but it took me another five minutes of searching before
I found Art3mis’s magic sneakers, near the south end of the crater. I put them on,
and they adjusted to fit my avatar’s feet perfectly. “I’ll get these back to you,
Arty,” I said, just as I finished lacing them up. “Promise.”
“You better,” she said. “They were my favorites.”
I took three running steps, leapt into the air, and then I was flying. I swooped
up and around, then turned back toward the gate, aiming straight for it. But at the
last moment, I banked to the right, then arced back around. I stopped to hover in
front of the open gate. The crystal doorway hung in the air directly ahead, just a
few yards away. It reminded me of the floating door in the opening credits of the
original Twilight Zone.
“What are you waiting for?” Aech shouted. “The Sixers could show up any
minute now!”
“I know,” I said. “But there’s something I need to say to all of you before I go

in.”
“Well?” Art3mis said. “Spit it out! The clock is ticking, fool!”
“OK, OK!” I said. “I just wanted to say that I know how the three of you must
feel right now. It isn’t fair, the way this has played out. We should all be entering
the gate together. So before I go in, I want you guys to know something. If I
reach the egg, I’m going to split the prize money equally among the four of us.”
Stunned silence.
“Hello?” I said after a few seconds. “Did you guys hear me?”
“Are you insane?” Aech asked. “Why would you do that, Z?”
“Because it’s the only honorable thing to do,” I said. “Because I never would
have gotten this far on my own. Because all four of us deserve to see what’s
inside that gate and find out how the game ends. And because I need your help.”
“Could you repeat that last bit, please?” Art3mis asked.
“I need your help,” I said. “You guys are right. This is my only shot at
clearing the Third Gate. There won’t be any second chances, for anyone. The
Sixers will be here soon, and they’ll enter the gate as soon as they arrive. So I
have to clear it before they do, on my first attempt. The odds of me pulling that
off will increase drastically if the three of you are backing me up. So … what do
you say?”
“Count me in, Z,” Aech said. “I was planning to coach your dumb ass
anyway.”
“Count me in too,” said Shoto. “I’ve got nothing left to lose.”
“Let me get this straight,” Art3mis said. “We help you clear the gate, and in
return, you agree to split the prize money with us?”
“Wrong,” I said. “If I win, I’m going to split the prize money with you guys,
regardless of whether you help me or not. So helping me is probably in your best
interest.”
“I don’t suppose we have time to get that in writing?” Art3mis said.
I thought for a moment, then accessed my POV channel’s control menu. I
initiated a live broadcast, so everyone watching my channel (my ratings counter
said I currently had more than two hundred million viewers) could hear what I
was about to say. “Greetings,” I said. “This is Wade Watts, also known as
Parzival. I want to let the whole world know that if and when I find Halliday’s
Easter egg, I hereby vow to split my winnings equally with Art3mis, Aech, and
Shoto. Cross my heart and hope to die. Gunter’s honor. Pinky swear. All of that
crap. If I’m lying, I should be forever branded as a gutless Sixer-fellating punk.”
As I finished the broadcast, I heard Art3mis say, “Dude, are you nuts? I was
kidding!”
“Oh,” I said. “Right. I knew that.”

I cracked my knuckles, then flew forward into the gate, and my avatar
vanished into the whirlpool of stars.

I found myself standing in a vast, dark, empty space. I couldn’t see the walls
or ceiling, but there appeared to be a floor, because I was standing on something.
I waited a few seconds, unsure of what to do. Then a booming electronic voice
echoed through the void. It sounded as if it were being generated by a primitive
speech synthesizer, like those used in Q*Bert and Gorf. “Beat the high score or
be destroyed!” the voice announced. A shaft of light appeared, shining down
from somewhere high above. There, in front of me, at the base of this long pillar
of light, stood an old coin-operated arcade game. I recognized its distinctive,
angular cabinet immediately. Tempest. Atari. 1980.
I closed my eyes and dropped my head. “Crap,” I muttered. “This is not my
best game, gang.”
“Come on,” I heard Art3mis whisper. “You had to know Tempest was going
to factor into the Third Gate somehow. It was so obvious!”
“Oh really?” I said. “Why?”
“Because of the quote on the last page of the Almanac,” she replied. “ ‘I must
uneasy make, lest too light winning make the prize light.’ ”
“I know the quote,” I said, annoyed. “It’s from Shakespeare. But I figured it
was just Halliday’s way of letting us know how difficult he was going to make
the Hunt.”
“It was,” Art3mis said. “But it was also a clue. That quote was taken from
Shakespeare’s final play, The Tempest.”
“Shit!” I hissed. “How the hell did I miss that?”
“I never made that connection either,” Aech confessed. “Bravo, Art3mis.”
“The game Tempest also appears briefly in the music video for the song
‘Subdivisions’ by Rush,” she added. “One of Halliday’s favorites. Pretty hard to
miss.”
“Whoa,” Shoto said. “She’s good.”
“OK!” I shouted. “It should have been obvious. No need to rub it in!”
“I take it you’ve haven’t had much practice at this game, Z?” Aech said.

“A little, a long time ago,” I said. “But not nearly enough. Look at the high
score.” I pointed at the monitor. The high score was 728,329. The initials next to
it were JDH—James Donovan Halliday. And, as I feared, the credit counter at
the bottom of the screen had a numeral one in front of it.
“Yikes,” Aech said. “Only one credit. Just like Black Tiger.”
I remembered the now-useless extra life quarter in my inventory and took it
out. But when I dropped it into the coin slot, it fell right through into the coin
return. I reached down to remove it and saw a sticker on the coin mechanism:
TOKENS ONLY.
“So much for that idea,” I said. “And I don’t see a token machine anywhere
around here.”
“Looks like you only get one game,” Aech said. “All or nothing.”
“Guys, I haven’t played Tempest in years,” I said. “I’m screwed. There’s no
way I’m going to beat Halliday’s high score on my first attempt.”
“You don’t have to,” Art3mis said. “Look at the copyright year.”
I glanced at the bottom of the screen: ©MCMLXXX ATARI.
“Nineteen eighty?” Aech said. “How does that help him?”
“Yeah,” I said. “How does that help me?”
“That means this is the very first version of Tempest,” Art3mis said. “The
version that shipped with a bug in the game code. When Tempest first hit the
arcades, kids discovered that if you died with a certain score, the machine would
give you a bunch of free credits.”
“Oh,” I said, somewhat ashamed. “I didn’t know that.”
“You would,” Art3mis said, “if you’d researched the game as much as I did.”
“Damn, girl,” Aech said. “You’ve got some serious knowledge.”
“Thanks,” she said. “It helps to be an obsessive-compulsive geek. With no
life.” Everyone laughed at that, except me. I was much too nervous.
“OK, Arty,” I said. “What do I need to do to get those free games?”
“I’m looking it up in my quest journal right now,” she said. I could hear paper
rustling. It sounded like she was flipping through the pages of an actual book.
“You just happen to have a hard copy of your journal with you?” I asked.
“I’ve always kept my journal longhand, in spiral notebooks,” she said. “Good
thing, too, since my OASIS account and everything in it was just erased.” More
flipping of pages. “Here it is! First, you need to rack up over one hundred eighty
thousand points. Once you’ve done that, make sure you end the game with a
score where the last two digits are oh six, eleven, or twelve. If you do that, you’ll
get forty free credits.”
“You’re absolutely positive?”
“Positively absolutely.”

“OK,” I said. “Here goes.”
I began to run through my pregame ritual. Stretching, cracking my knuckles,
rolling my head and neck left and right.
“Christ, will you get on with it?” Aech said. “The suspense is killing me
here!”
“Quiet!” Shoto said. “Give the man some room to breathe, will you?”
Everyone remained silent while I finished psyching myself up. “Here goes
nothing,” I said. Then I hit the flashing Player One button.
Tempest used old-school vector graphics, so the game’s images were created
from glowing neon lines drawn against a pitch-black screen. You’re given a topdown view of a three-dimensional tunnel, and you use a spinning rotary dial to
control a “shooter” that travels around the rim of the tunnel. The object of the
game is to shoot the enemies crawling up out of the tunnel toward you while
dodging their fire and avoiding other obstacles. As you proceed from one level
to the next, the tunnels take on gradually more complex geometric shapes, and
the number of enemies and obstacles crawling up toward you multiplies
drastically.
Halliday had put this Tempest machine on Tournament settings, so I couldn’t
start the game any higher than level nine. It took me about fifteen minutes to get
my score up above 180,000, and I lost two lives in the process. I was even rustier
than I thought. When my score hit 189,412, I intentionally impaled my shooter
on a spike, using up my last remaining life. The game prompted me to enter my
initials, and I nervously tapped them in: W-O-W.
When I finished, the game’s credit counter jumped from zero up to forty.
The sound of my friends’ wild cheers filled my ears, nearly giving me a heart
attack. “Art3mis, you’re a genius,” I said, once the noise died down.
“I know.”
I tapped the Player One button again and began a second game, now focused
on beating Halliday’s high score. I still felt anxious, but considerably less so. If I
didn’t manage to get the high score this time, I had thirty-nine more chances.
During a break between waves, Art3mis spoke up. “So, your initials are W-OW? What does the O stand for?”
“Obtuse,” I said.
She laughed. “No, seriously.”
“Owen.”
“Owen,” she repeated. “Wade Owen Watts. That’s nice.” Then she fell silent
again as the next wave began. I finished my second game a few minutes later,
with a score of 219,584. Not horrible, but a far cry from my goal.
“Not bad,” Aech said.

“Yeah, but not that good, either,” Shoto observed. Then he seemed to
remember that I could hear him. “I mean—much better, Parzival. You’re doing
great.”
“Thanks for the vote of confidence, Shoto.”
“Hey, check this out,” Art3mis said, reading from her journal. “The creator of
Tempest, Dave Theurer, originally got the idea for the game from a nightmare he
had about monsters crawling up out of a hole in the ground and chasing after
him.” She laughed her little musical laugh, which I hadn’t heard in so long.
“Isn’t that cool, Z?” she said.
“That is cool,” I replied. Somehow, just hearing her voice set me at ease. I
think she knew this, and that was why she kept talking to me. I felt reenergized. I
hit the Player One button again and began my third game.
They all watched me play in complete silence. Nearly an hour later, I lost my
last man. My final score was 437,977.
As soon as the game ended, Aech’s voice cut in. “Bad news, amigo,” she said.
“What?”
“We were right. When the Cataclyst went off, the Sixers had a group of
avatars in reserve, waiting just outside the sector. Right after the detonation, they
reentered the sector and headed straight for Chthonia. They …” Her voice trailed
off.
“They what?”
“They just entered the gate, about five minutes ago,” Art3mis answered. “The
gate closed after you went in, but when the Sixers arrived, they used three of
their own keys to reopen it.”
“You mean the Sixers are already inside the gate? Right now?”
“Eighteen of them,” Aech said. “When they stepped through the gate, each
one entered a stand-alone simulation. A separate instance of the gate. All
eighteen of them are playing Tempest right now, just like you. Trying to beat
Halliday’s high score. And all of them used the exploit to get forty free credits.
Most of them aren’t doing that well, but one of them has some serious skill. We
think Sorrento is probably operating that avatar. He just started his second game
—”
“Wait a second!” I interrupted. “How can you possibly know all this?”
“Because we can see them,” Shoto said. “Everyone logged into the OASIS
right now can see them. They can see you, too.”
“What the hell are you talking about?”
“The moment someone enters the Third Gate, a live vidfeed of their avatar
appears at the top of the Scoreboard,” Art3mis said. “Apparently, Halliday
wanted clearing the final gate to be a spectator sport.”

“Wait,” I said. “You mean to tell me that the entire world has been watching
me play Tempest for the past hour?”
“Correct,” Art3mis said. “And they’re watching you stand there and jabber
back at us right now too. So watch what you say.”
“Why didn’t you guys tell me?” I shouted.
“We didn’t want to make you nervous,” Aech said. “Or distract you.”
“Oh, great! Perfect! Thank you!” I was shouting, somewhat hysterically.
“Calm down, Parzival,” Art3mis said. “Get your head back in the game. This
a race now. There are eighteen Sixer avatars right behind you. So you need to
make this next game count. Understand?”
“Yeah,” I said, exhaling slowly. “I understand.” I took another deep breath and
pressed the Player One button once again.
As usual, competition brought out the best in me. This time, I managed to slip
into the zone. Spinner, zapper, super-zapper, clear a level, avoid the spikes. My
hands began to work the controls without my even having to think about it. I
forgot about what was at stake, and I forgot about the millions of people
watching me. I lost myself in the game.
I’d been playing just over an hour and had just cleared level 81 when I heard
another wild burst of cheering in my ears. “You did it, man!” I heard Shoto
shout.
My eyes darted up to the top of the screen. My score was 802,488.
I kept playing, instinctively wanting to get the highest score possible. But then
I heard Art3mis loudly clear her throat, and I realized there was no need to go
any further. In fact, I was now wasting valuable seconds, burning away whatever
lead I still had on the Sixers. I quickly depleted my two extra lives, and GAME
OVER flashed on the screen. I entered my initials again, and they appeared at the
top of the list, just above Halliday’s high score. Then the monitor went blank,
and a message appeared in the center of the screen:
WELL DONE, PARZIVAL!
PREPARE FOR STAGE 2!
Then the game cabinet vanished, and my avatar vanished with it.

I found myself galloping across a fog-covered hillside. I assumed I was riding a
horse, because I was bobbing up and down and I heard the sound of hoofbeats.
Directly ahead, a familiar-looking castle had just appeared out of the fog.
But when I looked down at my avatar’s body, I saw that I wasn’t riding a

horse at all. I was walking on the ground. My avatar was now dressed in a suit of
chain-mail armor, and my hands were held out in front of my body, as though I
were clutching a set of reins. But I wasn’t holding anything. My hands were
completely empty.
I stopped moving forward and the sound of hoofbeats also ceased, but not
until a few seconds later. I turned around and saw the source of the sound. It
wasn’t a horse. It was a man banging two coconut halves together.
Then I knew where I was. Inside the first scene of Monty Python and the Holy
Grail. Another of Halliday’s favorite films, and perhaps the most-beloved geek
film of all time.
It appeared to be another Flicksync, like the WarGames simulation inside Gate
One.
I was playing King Arthur, I realized. I wore the same costume Graham
Chapman had worn in the film. And the man with the coconuts was my trusty
manservant, Patsy, as played by Terry Gilliam.
Patsy bowed and groveled a bit when I turned to face him, but said nothing.
“It’s Python’s Holy Grail!” I heard Shoto whisper excitedly.
“Duh,” I said, forgetting myself for a second. “I know that, Shoto.”
A warning flashed on my display: INCORRECT DIALOGUE! A score of –100
points appeared in the corner of my display.
“Smooth move, Ex-lax,” I heard Art3mis say.
“Just let us know if you need any help, Z,” Aech said. “Wave your hands or
something, and we’ll feed you the next line.”
I nodded and gave a thumbs-up. But I didn’t think I was going to need much
help. Over the past six years, I’d watched Holy Grail exactly 157 times. I knew
every word by heart.
I glanced back up at the castle ahead of me, already aware of what was
waiting for me there. I began to “gallop” again, holding my invisible reins as I
pretended to ride forward. Once again, Patsy began to bang his coconut halves
together, galloping along behind me. When we reached the entrance of the
castle, I pulled back on my “reins” and brought my “steed” to a halt.
“Whoa there!” I shouted.
My score increased by 100 points, bringing it back up to zero.
On cue, two soldiers appeared up above, leaning over the castle wall. “Who
goes there?” one of them shouted down at us.
“It is I, Arthur, son of Uther Pendragon, from the castle of Camelot,” I recited.
“King of the Britons! Defeater of the Saxons! Sovereign of all England!”
My score jumped another 500 points, and a message informed me that I’d
received a bonus for my accent and inflection. I felt myself relax, and I realized I

was already having fun.
“Pull the other one!” the soldier replied.
“I am,” I continued. “And this is my trusty servant Patsy. We have ridden the
length and breadth of the land in search of knights who will join me in my court
at Camelot. I must speak with your lord and master!”
Another 500 points. In my ear, I could hear my friends giggling and
applauding.
“What?” the other soldier replied. “Ridden on a horse?”
“Yes!” I said. 100 points.
“You’re using coconuts!”
“What?” I said. 100 points.
“You’ve got two empty halves of coconut and you’re bangin’ ’em together!”
“So? We have ridden since the snows of winter covered this land, through the
kingdom of Mercia, through—” Another 500 points.
“Where’d you get the coconuts?”
And so it went. The character I was playing changed from one scene to the
next, switching to whomever had the most dialogue. Incredibly, I flubbed only
six or seven lines. Each time I got stumped, all I had to do was shrug and hold
out my hands, palms up—my signal that I needed some help—and Aech,
Art3mis, and Shoto would all gleefully feed me the correct line. The rest of the
time they remained silent except for the occasional giggle fit or burst of laughter.
The only really difficult part was not laughing myself, especially when Art3mis
started doing note-perfect recitations of all of Carol Cleveland’s lines in the
Castle Anthrax scene. I cracked up a few times and got hit with score penalties
for it. Otherwise, it was smooth sailing.
Reenacting the film wasn’t just easy—it was a total blast.
About halfway through the movie, right after my confrontation with the
Knights of Ni, I opened up a text window on my display and typed STATUS ON
THE SIXERS?

“Fifteen of them are still playing Tempest,” I heard Aech reply. “But three of
them beat Halliday’s score and are now inside the Grail simulation.” A brief
pause. “And the leader—Sorrento, we think—is running just nine minutes
behind you.”
“And so far, he hasn’t missed a single line of dialogue,” Shoto added.
I nearly cursed out loud, then caught myself and typed SHIT!
“Exactly,” Art3mis said.
I took a deep breath and returned my attention to the next scene (“The Tale of
Sir Launcelot”). Aech continued to give me updates on the Sixers whenever I
asked for them.

When I reached the film’s final scene (the assault on the French Castle), I
grew anxious again, wondering what would happen next. The First Gate had
required me to reenact a movie (WarGames), and the Second Gate had contained
a videogame challenge (Black Tiger). So far, the Third Gate had contained both.
I knew there must be a third stage, but I had no idea what it might be.
I got my answer a few minutes later. As soon as I completed Holy Grail’s final
scene, my display went black while the silly organ music that ends the film
played for a few minutes. When the music stopped, the following appeared on
my display:
CONGRATULATIONS!
YOU HAVE REACHED THE END!
READY PLAYER 1
And then, as the text faded away, I found myself standing in a huge oakpaneled room as big as a warehouse, with a high vaulted ceiling and a polished
hardwood floor. The room had no windows, and only one exit—large double
doors set into one of the four bare walls. An older high-end OASIS immersion
rig stood in the absolute center of the expansive room. Over a hundred glass
tables surrounded the rig, arranged in a large oval around it. On each table there
was a different classic home computer or videogame system, accompanied by
tiered racks that appeared to hold a complete collection of its peripherals,
controllers, software, and games. All of it was arranged perfectly, like a museum
exhibit. Looking around the circle, from one system to the next, I saw that the
computers seemed to be arranged roughly by year of origin. A PDP-1. An Altair
8800. An IMSAI 8080. An Apple I, right next to an Apple II. An Atari 2600. A
Commodore PET. An Intellivision. Several different TRS-80 models. An Atari
400 and 800. A ColecoVision. A TI-99/4. A Sinclair ZX80. A Commodore 64.
Various Nintendo and Sega game systems. The entire lineage of Macs and PCs,
PlayStations and Xboxes. Finally, completing the circle, was an OASIS console
—connected to the immersion rig in the center of the room.
I realized that I was standing in a re-creation of James Halliday’s office, the
room in his mansion where he’d spent most of the last fifteen years of his life.
The place where he’d coded his last and greatest game. The one I was now
playing.
I’d never seen any photos of this room, but its layout and contents had been
described in great detail by the movers hired to clear the place out after
Halliday’s death.
I looked down at my avatar and saw that I no longer appeared as one of the

Monty Python knights. I was Parzival once again.
First, I did the obvious and tried the exit. The doors wouldn’t budge.
I turned back and took another long look around the room, surveying the long
line of monuments to the history of computing and videogames.
That was when I realized that the oval-shaped ring in which they were
arranged actually formed the outline of an egg.
In my head, I recited the words of Halliday’s first riddle, the one in Anorak’s
Invitation:
Three hidden keys open three secret gates
Wherein the errant will be tested for worthy traits
And those with the skill to survive these straits
Will reach The End where the prize awaits
I’d reached the end. This was it. Halliday’s Easter egg must be hidden
somewhere in this room.

“Do you guys see this?” I whispered.
There was no reply.
“Hello? Aech? Art3mis? Shoto? Are you guys still there?”
Still no reply. Either Og had cut their voice links to me, or Halliday had coded
this final stage of the gate so that no outside communication was possible. I was
pretty sure it was the latter.
I stood there in silence for a minute, unsure of what to do. Then I followed my
first instinct and walked over to the Atari 2600. It was hooked up to a 1977
Zenith Color TV. I turned on the TV, but nothing happened. Then I switched on
the Atari. Still nothing. There was no power, even though both the TV and the
Atari were plugged into electrical outlets set into the floor.
I tried the Apple II on the table beside it. It wouldn’t switch on either.
After a few minutes of experimentation, I discovered that the only computer
that would power on was one of the oldest, the IMSAI 8080, the same model of
computer Matthew Broderick owned in WarGames.
When I booted it up, the screen was completely blank, save for one word.
LOGIN:
I typed in ANORAK and hit Enter.
IDENTIFICATION
TERMINATED.

NOT

RECOGNIZED—CONNECTION

Then the computer shut itself off and I had to power it back on to get the
LOGIN prompt again.
I tried HALLIDAY. No dice.
In WarGames, the backdoor password that had granted access to the WOPR
supercomputer was “Joshua.” Professor Falken, the creator of the WOPR, had

used the name of his son for the password. The person he’d loved most in the
world.
I typed in OG. It didn’t work. OGDEN didn’t work either.
I typed in KIRA and hit the Enter key.
IDENTIFICATION
TERMINATED.

NOT

RECOGNIZED—CONNECTION

I tried each of his parents’ first names. I tried ZAPHOD, the name of his pet fish.
Then TIBERIUS, the name of a ferret he’d once owned.
None of them worked.
I checked the time. I’d been in this room for over ten minutes now. Which
meant that Sorrento had caught up with me. So he would now be inside his own
separate copy of this room, probably with a team of Halliday scholars
whispering suggestions in his ear, thanks to his hacked immersion rig. They were
probably already working from a prioritized list of possibilities, entering them as
fast as Sorrento could type.
I was out of time.
I clenched my teeth in frustration. I had no idea what to try next.
Then I remembered a line from Ogden Morrow’s biography: The opposite sex
made Jim extremely nervous, and Kira was the only girl that I ever saw him
speak to in a relaxed manner. But even then, it was only in-character, as Anorak,
during the course of our gaming sessions, and he would only address her as
Leucosia, the name of her D&D character.
I rebooted the computer again. When the LOGIN prompt reappeared, I typed in
LEUCOSIA. Then I hit the Enter key.
Every system in the room powered itself on. The sounds of whirring disk
drives, self-test beeps, and other boot-up sounds echoed off the vaulted ceiling.
I ran back over to the Atari 2600 and searched through the giant rack of
alphabetized game cartridges beside it until I found the one I was looking for:
Adventure. I shoved it into the Atari and turned the system on, then hit the Reset
switch to start the game.
It took me only a few minutes to reach the Secret Room.
I grabbed the sword and used it to slay all three of the dragons. Then I found
the black key, opened the gates of the Black Castle, and ventured into its
labyrinth. The gray dot was hidden right where it was supposed to be. I picked it
up and carried it back across the tiny 8-bit kingdom, then used it to pass through
the magic barrier and enter the Secret Room. But unlike the original Atari game,
this Secret Room didn’t contain the name of Warren Robinett, Adventure’s

original programmer. Instead, at the very center of the screen, there was a large
white oval with pixelated edges. An egg.
The egg.
I stared at the TV screen in stunned silence for a moment. Then I pulled the
Atari joystick to the right, moving my tiny square avatar across the flickering
screen. The TV’s mono speaker emitted a brief electronic bip sound as I dropped
the gray dot and picked up the egg. As I did, there was a brilliant flash of light,
and then I saw that my avatar was no longer holding a joystick. Now, cupped in
both of my hands, was a large silver egg. I could see my avatar’s warped
reflection on its curved surface.
When I finally managed to stop staring at it, I looked up and saw that the
double doors on the other side of the room had been replaced with the gate exit
—a crystal-edged portal leading back into the foyer of Castle Anorak. The castle
appeared to have been completely restored, even though the OASIS server still
wouldn’t reset for several more hours.
I took one last look around Halliday’s office; then, still clutching the egg in
my hands, I walked across the room and stepped through the exit.
As soon as I was through it, I turned around just in time to see the Crystal
Gate transform into a large wooden door set into the castle wall.
I opened the wooden door. Beyond it there was a spiral staircase that led up to
the top of Castle Anorak’s tallest tower. There, I found Anorak’s study. Towering
shelves lined the room, filled with ancient scrolls and dusty spellbooks.
I walked over to the window and looked out on a stunning view of the
surrounding landscape. It was no longer barren. The effects of the Cataclyst had
been undone, and all of Chthonia appeared to be have been restored along with
the castle.
I looked around the room. Directly beneath the familiar black dragon painting
there was an ornate crystal pedestal on which rested a gold chalice encrusted
with tiny jewels. Its diameter matched that of the silver egg I held in my hands.
I placed the egg in the chalice, and it fit perfectly.
In the distance, I heard a fanfare of trumpets, and the egg began to glow.
“You win,” I heard a voice say. I turned and saw that Anorak was standing
right behind me. His obsidian black robes seemed to pull most of the sunlight
out of the room. “Congratulations,” he said, stretching out his long-fingered
hand.
I hesitated, wondering if this was another trick. Or perhaps one final test …
“The game is over,” Anorak said, as if he’d read my mind. “It’s time for you
to receive your prize.”
I looked down at his outstretched hand. Then, after a moment’s hesitation, I

took it.
Cascading bolts of blue lightning erupted in the space between us, and their
spiderweb tines enveloped us both, as if a surge of power were passing from his
avatar into mine. When the lightning subsided, I saw that Anorak was no longer
dressed in his black wizard’s robes. In fact, he no longer looked like Anorak at
all. He was shorter, thinner, and somewhat less handsome. Now he looked like
James Halliday. Pale. Middle-aged. He was dressed in worn jeans and a faded
Space Invaders T-shirt.
I looked down at my own avatar and discovered that I was now wearing
Anorak’s robes. Then I realized that the icons and readouts around the edge of
my display had also changed. My stats were all completely maxxed out, and I
now had a list of spells, inherent powers, and magic items that seemed to scroll
on forever.
My avatar’s level and hit-point counters both had infinity symbols in front of
them.
And my credit readout now displayed a number twelve digits long. I was a
multibillionaire.
“I’m entrusting the care of the OASIS to you now, Parzival,” Halliday said.
“Your avatar is immortal and all-powerful. Whatever you want, all you have to
do is wish for it. Pretty sweet, eh?” He leaned toward me and lowered his voice.
“Do me a favor. Try and use your powers only for good. OK?”
“OK,” I said, in a voice that was barely a whisper.
Halliday smiled, then gestured around us. “This is your castle now. I’ve coded
this room so that only your avatar can enter it. I did this to ensure that you alone
have access to this.” He walked over to a bookshelf against the wall and pulled
on the spine of one of the volumes it held. I heard a click; then the bookshelf slid
aside, revealing a square metal plate set into the wall. In the center of the plate
there was a comically large red button embossed with a single word: OFF.
“I call this the Big Red Button,” Halliday said. “If you press it, it will shut off
the entire OASIS and launch a worm that will delete everything stored on the
GSS servers, including all of the OASIS source code. It will shut down the
OASIS forever.” He smirked. “So don’t press it unless you’re absolutely positive
it’s the right thing to do, OK?” He gave me an odd smile. “I trust your
judgment.”
Halliday slid the bookshelf back into place, concealing the button once again.
Then he startled me by putting his arm around my shoulders. “Listen,” he said,
adopting a confidential tone. “I need to tell you one last thing before I go.
Something I didn’t figure out for myself until it was already too late.” He led me
over to the window and motioned out at the landscape stretching out beyond it.

“I created the OASIS because I never felt at home in the real world. I didn’t
know how to connect with the people there. I was afraid, for all of my life. Right
up until I knew it was ending. That was when I realized, as terrifying and painful
as reality can be, it’s also the only place where you can find true happiness.
Because reality is real. Do you understand?”
“Yes,” I said. “I think I do.”
“Good,” he said, giving me a wink. “Don’t make the same mistake I did.
Don’t hide in here forever.”
He smiled and took a few steps away from me. “All right. I think that covers
everything. It’s time for me to blow this pop stand.”
Then Halliday began to disappear. He smiled and waved good-bye as his
avatar slowly faded out of existence.
“Good luck, Parzival,” he said. “And thanks. Thanks for playing my game.”
Then he was completely gone.

“Are you guys there?” I said to the empty air a few minutes later.
“Yes!” Aech said excitedly. “Can you hear us?”
“Yeah. I can now. What happened?”
“The system cut off our voice links to you as soon as you entered Halliday’s
office, so we couldn’t talk to you.”
“Luckily, you didn’t need our help anyway,” Shoto said. “Good job, man.”
“Congratulations, Wade,” I heard Art3mis say. And I could tell she meant it
too.
“Thanks,” I said. “But I couldn’t have done it without you guys.”
“You’re right,” Art3mis said. “Remember to mention that when you talk to the
media. Og says there are a few hundred reporters on their way here right now.”
I glanced back over at the bookshelf that concealed the Big Red Button. “Did
you guys see everything Halliday said to me before he vanished?” I asked.
“No,” Art3mis said. “We saw everything up until he told you to ‘try and use
your powers only for good.’ Then your vidfeed cut out. What happened after
that?”
“Nothing much,” I said. “I’ll tell you about it later.”
“Dude,” Aech said. “You’ve got to check the Scoreboard.”
I opened a window and pulled up the Scoreboard. The list of high scores was
gone. Now the only thing displayed on Halliday’s website was an image of my
avatar, dressed in Anorak’s robes, holding the silver egg, along with the words
PARZIVAL WINS!

“What happened to the Sixers?” I asked. “The ones who were still inside the

gate?”
“We’re not sure,” Aech said. “Their vidfeeds vanished when the Scoreboard
changed.”
“Maybe their avatars were killed,” Shoto said. “Or maybe …”
“Maybe they were just ejected from the gate,” I said.
I pulled up my map of Chthonia and saw that I could now teleport anywhere
in the OASIS simply by selecting my desired destination in the atlas. I zoomed
in on Castle Anorak and tapped a spot just outside the front entrance, and in a
blink, my avatar was standing there.
I was right. When I’d cleared the Third Gate, the eighteen Sixer avatars who
were still inside had been ejected from the gate and deposited in front of the
castle. They were all standing there with confused looks on their faces when I
appeared in front of them, resplendent in my new threads. They all stared at me
in silence for a few seconds, then pulled out guns and swords, preparing to
attack. They all looked identical, so I couldn’t tell which one was being
controlled by Sorrento. But at this point, I didn’t really care.
Using my avatar’s new superuser interface, I made a sweeping gesture with
my hand, selecting all of the Sixer avatars on my display. Their outlines began to
glow red. Then I tapped the skull-and-crossbones icon that now appeared on my
avatar’s toolbar. All eighteen Sixer avatars instantly dropped dead. Their bodies
slowly faded out of existence, each leaving behind a tiny pile of weapons and
loot.
“Holy shit!” I heard Shoto say over the comlink. “How did you do that?”
“You heard Halliday,” Aech said. “His avatar is immortal and all-powerful.”
“Yeah,” I said. “He wasn’t kidding, either.”
“Halliday also said you could wish for whatever you wanted,” Aech said.
“What are you gonna wish for first?”
I thought about that for a second; then I tapped the new Command icon that
now appeared at the edge of my display and said, “I wish for Aech, Art3mis, and
Shoto to be resurrected.”
A dialog window popped up, asking me to confirm the spelling of each of
their avatar names. Once I did, the system asked me if, in addition to
resurrecting their avatars, I wanted to restore all of their lost items, too. I tapped
the Yes icon. Then a message appeared in the center of my display:
RESURRECTION COMPLETE. AVATARS RESTORED.
“Guys?” I said. “You might want to try logging back into your accounts now.”
“We’re already on our way!” Aech shouted.
A few seconds later, Shoto logged back into his account, and his avatar
materialized a short distance in front of me, in the exact spot where he’d been

killed a few hours earlier. He ran over to me, grinning from ear to ear. “Arigato,
Parzival-san,” he said, bowing low.
I returned the bow, then threw my arms around him. “Welcome back,” I said.
A moment later, Aech emerged from the castle entrance and ran over to join us.
“Good as new,” he said, grinning down at his restored avatar. “Thanks, Z.”
“De nada.” I glanced back through the castle’s open entrance. “Where’s
Art3mis? She should have reappeared right next to you—”
“She didn’t log back in,” Aech said. “She said she wanted to go outside and
get some fresh air.”
“You saw her? What—?” I searched for the right words. “How did she look?”
They both just smiled at me; then Aech rested a hand on my shoulder. “She
said she’d be outside waiting for you. Whenever you’re ready to meet her.”
I nodded. I was about to tap my Log-out icon when Aech held up her—his—
hand. “Wait a second! Before you log out, you’ve got to see something,” he said,
opening a window in front of me. “This is airing on all of the newsfeeds right
now. The feds just took Sorrento in for questioning. They stormed into IOI
headquarters and yanked him right out of his haptic chair!”
A video clip began to play. Handheld camera footage showed a team of
federal agents leading Sorrento across the lobby of the IOI corporate
headquarters. He was still wearing his haptic suit and was shadowed by a grayhaired man in a suit who I assumed was his attorney. Sorrento looked annoyed
more than anything, as if this were all just a mild inconvenience. The caption
along the bottom of the window read: Top IOI Executive Sorrento Accused of
Murder.
“The newsfeeds have been playing clips from the simcap of your chatlink
session with Sorrento all day,” Aech said, pausing the clip. “Especially the part
where he threatens to kill you and then blows up your aunt’s trailer.”
Aech hit Play, and the news clip continued. The federal agents continued to
usher Sorrento through the lobby, which was packed with reporters, all pushing
against one another and shouting questions. The reporter shooting the video we
were watching lunged forward and jammed the camera in Sorrento’s face. “Did
you give the order to kill Wade Watts personally?” the reporter shouted. “How
does it feel to know you just lost the contest?”
Sorrento smiled, but didn’t reply. Then his attorney stepped in front of the
camera and addressed the reporters. “The charges leveled against my client are
preposterous,” he said. “The simcap being circulated is clearly a doctored fake.
We have no other comment at this time.”
Sorrento nodded. He continued to smile as the feds led him out of the
building.

“The bastard will probably get off scot-free,” I said. “IOI can afford to hire the
best lawyers in the world.”
“Yes, they can,” Aech said. Then he flashed his Cheshire grin. “But now so
can we.”

When I stepped out of the immersion bay, Og was standing there waiting for
me. “Well done, Wade!” he said, pulling me into a crushing bear hug. “Well
done!”
“Thanks, Og.” I was still dazed and felt unsteady on my feet.
“Several chief executives from GSS arrived while you were logged in,” Og
said. “Along with all of Jim’s lawyers. They’re all waiting upstairs. As you can
imagine, they’re anxious to speak with you.”
“Do I have to talk to them right now?”
“No, of course not!” He laughed. “They all work for you now, remember?
Make the bastards wait as long as you like!” He leaned forward. “My lawyer is
up there too. He’s a good guy. A real pit bull. He’ll make sure that no one messes
with you, OK?”
“Thanks, Og,” I said. “I really owe you.”
“Nonsense!” he said. “I should be thanking you. I haven’t had this much fun
in decades! You did good, kid.”
I glanced around uncertainly. Aech and Shoto were still in their immersion
bays, holding an impromptu online press conference. But Art3mis’s bay was
empty. I turned back to Og.
“Do you know which way Art3mis went?”
Og grinned at me, then pointed. “Up those stairs and out the first door you
see,” he said. “She said she’d wait for you at the center of my hedge maze.” He
smiled. “It’s an easy maze. It shouldn’t take you very long to find her.”
I stepped outside and squinted as my eyes adjusted to the light. The air was
warm, and the sun was already high overheard. There wasn’t a cloud in the sky.
It was a beautiful day.
The hedge maze covered several acres of land behind the mansion. The
entrance was designed to look like the facade of a castle, and you entered the
maze through its open gates. The dense hedge walls that comprised the maze
were ten feet tall, making it impossible to peek over them, even if you stood on

top of one of the benches placed throughout the labyrinth.
I entered the maze and wandered around in circles for a few minutes,
confused. Eventually, I realized that the maze’s layout was identical to the
labyrinth in Adventure.
After that, it took me only a few more minutes to find my way to the large
open area at the maze’s center. A large fountain stood there, with a detailed stone
sculpture of Adventure’s three duck-shaped dragons. Each dragon was spitting a
stream of water instead of breathing fire.
And then I saw her.
She was sitting on a stone bench, staring into the fountain. She had her back to
me, and her head was tilted down. Her long black hair spilled down over her
right shoulder. I could see that she was kneading her hands in her lap.
I was afraid to move any closer. Finally, I worked up the courage to speak.
“Hello,” I said.
She lifted her head at the sound of my voice, but didn’t turn around.
“Hello,” I heard her say. And it was her voice. Art3mis’s voice. The voice I’d
spent so many hours listening to. And that gave me the courage to step forward.
I walked around the fountain and stopped once I was standing directly in front
of her. As she heard me approach, she turned her head away, averting her eyes
and keeping me out of her field of vision.
But I could see her.
She looked just as she had in the photo I’d seen. She had the same
Rubenesque body. The same pale, freckled skin. The same hazel eyes and raven
hair. The same beautiful round face, with the same reddish birthmark. But unlike
in that photo, she wasn’t trying to hide the birthmark with a sweep of her hair.
She had her hair brushed back, so I could see it.
I waited in silence. But she still wouldn’t look up at me.
“You look just like I always pictured you,” I said. “Beautiful.”
“Really?” she said softly. Slowly, she turned to face me, taking in my
appearance a little at a time, starting with my feet and then gradually working
her way up to my face. When our eyes finally met, she smiled at me nervously.
“Well, what do you know? You look just like I always thought you would too,”
she said. “Butt ugly.”
We both laughed, and most of the tension in the air dissipated. Then we stared
into each other’s eyes for what seemed like a long time. It was, I realized, also
the very first time.
“We haven’t been formally introduced,” she said. “I’m Samantha.”
“Hello, Samantha. I’m Wade.”
“It’s nice to finally meet you in person, Wade.”

She patted the bench beside her, and I sat down.
After a long silence, she said, “So what happens now?”
I smiled. “We’re going to use all of the moolah we just won to feed everyone
on the planet. We’re going to make the world a better place, right?”
She grinned. “Don’t you want to build a huge interstellar spaceship, load it
full of videogames, junk food, and comfy couches, and then get the hell out of
here?”
“I’m up for that, too,” I said. “If it means I get to spend the rest of my life with
you.”
She gave me a shy smile. “We’ll have to see,” she said. “We just met, you
know.”
“I’m in love with you.”
Her lower lip started to tremble. “You’re sure about that?”
“Yes. I am. Because it’s true.”
She smiled at me, but I also saw that she was crying. “I’m sorry for breaking
things off with you,” she said. “For disappearing from your life. I just—”
“It’s OK,” I said. “I understand why you did it now.”
She looked relieved. “You do?”
I nodded. “You did the right thing.”
“You think so?”
“We won, didn’t we?”
She smiled at me, and I smiled back.
“Listen,” I said. “We can take things as slow as you like. I’m really a nice guy,
once you get to know me. I swear.”
She laughed and wiped away a few of her tears, but she didn’t say anything.
“Did I mention that I’m also extremely rich?” I said. “Of course, so are you,
so I don’t suppose that’s a big selling point.”
“You don’t need to sell me on anything, Wade,” she said. “You’re my best
friend. My favorite person.” With what appeared to be some effort, she looked
me in the eye. “I’ve really missed you, you know that?”
My heart felt like it was on fire. I took a moment to work up my courage; then
I reached out and took her hand. We sat there awhile, holding hands, reveling in
the strange new sensation of actually touching one another.
Some time later, she leaned over and kissed me. It felt just like all those songs
and poems had promised it would. It felt wonderful. Like being struck by
lightning.
It occurred to me then that for the first time in as long as I could remember, I
had absolutely no desire to log back into the OASIS.

